[Amit Varma]: When I was born in the 1970s, India's politics was dominated by one party. Less than five
[Amit Varma]: decades later, our politics is still dominated by one party. But before you start lamenting
[Amit Varma]: this unchanging hegemony, note that that party has changed. Once a Congress ruled India,
[Amit Varma]: and ruled is a correct word because we are subjects and not citizens, but today, the
[Amit Varma]: BJP rules India. Now, I've had a bunch of episodes in which I've looked at the rise
[Amit Varma]: of Hindutva, both as a cultural and political phenomenon. But I haven't looked at the decline
[Amit Varma]: of the Congress in any detail. And that's an important subject. Our democracy, in order
[Amit Varma]: to be healthy, needs competition in the political marketplace. One dominant player can never
[Amit Varma]: be a good thing. But right now, the Congress is in freefall. And it is worth asking why.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is Rahul Verma, a political scientist
[Amit Varma]: based in New Delhi. Rahul had first joined me in episode 131 of the show, in which we
[Amit Varma]: spoke about the book he co-authored with Pradeep Chhibber, Ideology and Identity. Now, we know
[Amit Varma]: that the usual spectrum of left and right does not apply to India. I used to believe,
[Amit Varma]: therefore, that ideology was absent in Indian politics, that it was all about identity and
[Amit Varma]: patronage. Rahul and Pradeep's book challenged this way of thinking. Yeah, there's no right
[Amit Varma]: or left in India, they said. But there is ideology. The fault lines are different. Now,
[Amit Varma]: Rahul and I will revisit some of that territory in this episode, but his work has gone a lot
[Amit Varma]: beyond. He wrote to me last week saying he was visiting Mumbai. Let's catch up for coffee.
[Amit Varma]: Coffee, I said mockingly. Coffee is not enough. Come home. Let's do an episode in my new home
[Amit Varma]: studio. Tell me what you've been working on. At that point, he sent me a couple of chapters
[Amit Varma]: of a book he is co-writing with another brilliant thinker from Delhi, whom I haven't met yet,
[Amit Varma]: Hasim Ali. Their book is about the decline of the Congress Party. This is such a fascinating
[Amit Varma]: subject to me and also such an important one. Now, regular listeners will know my position
[Amit Varma]: on the Congress Party as it stands now. I believe India needs a strong opposition now
[Amit Varma]: more than ever. Only the Congress has a party organisation to oppose the BJP nationally.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, it is hobbled by an incompetent leadership that has inherited its position, not earned
[Amit Varma]: it. For all of Rahul Gandhi's rhetoric on democracy, he does not believe in it and is
[Amit Varma]: scared of holding inner party elections. This is not surprising. In the words of Ram Guha
[Amit Varma]: from a past episode we did together, Gandhi is a born loser. Look at electoral results
[Amit Varma]: and you'll find that this is a bland fact. You cannot dispute it. Look at 2014, look
[Amit Varma]: at 2019, look at the numbers. He is, in fact, a gift to Narendra Modi. Now, be that as it
[Amit Varma]: may, even if you disagree with me on this one subject, he is not the only reason and
[Amit Varma]: his family is not the only reason that the Congress has declined. This decline has been
[Amit Varma]: happening for decades. To understand it, we need to understand how Indian society has
[Amit Varma]: changed and how Indian politics has changed. I expect many insights to come from Rahul
[Amit Varma]: and Aseem's book, which is right now a work in progress. And I teased out a few strands
[Amit Varma]: from that in my conversation with Rahul. And I just love talking to him because he's not
[Amit Varma]: an ivory tower intellectual. He really gets his country, he gets our politics. And I always
[Amit Varma]: learn something from my conversations with him. Before we begin, though, let's take a
[Amit Varma]: quick commercial break. Arthur C. Clarke once said, quote, any sufficiently advanced technology
[Amit Varma]: is indistinguishable from magic. Stop quote. I am speaking in my room. You can hear me
[Amit Varma]: where you are. For most of human history, we'd have been locked up in a padded cell
[Amit Varma]: for making this claim. But an even greater magic is how this thing called the internet
[Amit Varma]: holds together. And one of the unseen forces driving this magic comes from the sponsors
[Amit Varma]: of this episode, Intel. Think about the architecture of the internet. Much of the scaffolding comes
[Amit Varma]: from Intel. And one of the many ways in which Intel is enabling all of us to do what we
[Amit Varma]: do is through the cloud. More and more companies are turning to the cloud in order to be more
[Amit Varma]: agile, more secure, more efficient. Intel Xeon scalable processors help run the cloud,
[Amit Varma]: optimize performance for your specific workload, and makes your data secure and easy to manage.
[Amit Varma]: It's available across multiple cloud providers, and it provides crazy bang for the buck. It's
[Amit Varma]: the unseen force behind so much of the internet. Maybe Intel is the reason you're listening
[Amit Varma]: to me right now. Where there's cloud, there's Intel. Rahul, welcome back to the scene and
[Guest]: the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you, Amit. Thank you for having me again.
[Amit Varma]: The last time we spoke, it was a memorable conversation for me for a number of reasons.
[Amit Varma]: But the format was different. We did spend a little bit of time talking about your past
[Amit Varma]: and your journey, but not as much as I would really like to. And in fact, that I'm curious
[Amit Varma]: about. I think that's where I'd like to kind of begin today. Tell me a little bit more
[Amit Varma]: about yourself. Where did you grow up? What were your early years like?
[Guest]: Okay, so I was born in what today is known as Ambedkar Nagar district. It was earlier
[Guest]: part of Faizabad or Ayodhya district in Uttar Pradesh. So I come from deep rural Hindi heartland
[Guest]: of India. I was born in 86. So basically, in political terms, like a moment in the heartland,
[Guest]: especially in UP, a lot of churning was happening. You had Dalit assertion taking place, you
[Guest]: had Mandal Commission recommendations made in 1989. And you had Babri Masjid demolition
[Guest]: in 1992. So as a teenage, while I definitely didn't understand any of the things, it was
[Guest]: happening very close to me and in front of my eyes. So in some senses, perhaps subconsciously
[Guest]: or unconsciously, my decision to become a political scientist might have been driven
[Guest]: by some of these things that happened around me during my childhood.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one of the things I remember from our last episode was something that you said,
[Amit Varma]: I think Suyash Rai said, Akshay Mukul said around that same period of three or four months
[Amit Varma]: when I spoke to all of you, which is how much of a difference imbibing information in Hindi,
[Amit Varma]: in the case of all three of you, really made. Something that I keep going back to is that
[Amit Varma]: we, English-speaking elite, should really be a little more humble, because we are hobbled
[Amit Varma]: by really reading and getting an understanding of the country from one language. I therefore
[Amit Varma]: want to ask a dual question. One is, of course, that you are reading Hindi newspapers, you
[Amit Varma]: are imbibing a lot from the language, and how does that change the way you view the
[Amit Varma]: world vis-a-vis the people who are perhaps your colleagues today? Though not all of them
[Amit Varma]: will be English-speaking elites, but some of them would be, vis-a-vis the big city folk,
[Amit Varma]: as it were. And two, growing up around that time, growing up where you did, you are also
[Amit Varma]: imbibing the animal spirits of that era, right? In the sense that you are there in the thick
[Amit Varma]: of things. You are not at that stage where you are someone in a big city reading the
[Amit Varma]: newspapers or reading books and learning about it at an intellectual level. Before you even
[Amit Varma]: try to think of it at an intellectual level, the shit's happening all around you. You're
[Amit Varma]: kind of seeing it play out. You're seeing all these deep-rooted resentments boiling
[Amit Varma]: over. You're seeing new resentments coming to being. For example, when Mandal happens
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, and also while Hindutva is becoming resurgent. So now when you look back
[Amit Varma]: on that, tell me a little bit about that. What role did it play in shaping you? Was
[Amit Varma]: there a point in time where you were a different person from what you are now, when you are
[Amit Varma]: in that mahal, as it were, but you haven't yet started thinking about the world independently?
[Guest]: So it's a hard question to go back like 30 years and think how different I have become.
[Guest]: But I can join the threads and think of a journey. So let's first look at the first
[Guest]: question, which is about Hindi versus English. I think it's less to do with Hindi versus
[Guest]: English. It's basically to do with the diversity of information that is pouring in. And each
[Guest]: of our regional languages, be it Tamil, be it Kannada, be it Gujarati, be it Bengali,
[Guest]: all have much more diverse tradition and culture of writing in all forms. It could be bhakti
[Guest]: to protest and to singing about religion and God and other things. So I think what people
[Guest]: who read only one language, and it could be even for people who do just Hindi, they might
[Guest]: be missing the opinions that are being generated in the second language. So my suggestion would
[Guest]: always be to read as many languages as you can. But of course, we all are limited in
[Guest]: that sense. And so two or three is okay. And I like because I get one Hindi newspaper and
[Guest]: two newspapers in English at my home even today, I can see how the placement of news
[Guest]: on the first page differs, both Delhi edition, right? And not just the placement of news,
[Guest]: but the tone and tenor of the like the headlines and how the news opens is different. Of course,
[Guest]: the opinion pages are going to be very different because very different set of people are writing
[Guest]: in Hindi or regional language columns and very different set of people are writing in
[Guest]: English. So it opens you to a very different sort of world. Now, growing up and I was like,
[Guest]: you know, I spent my first eight to 10 years in my village, I grew up there. I used to
[Guest]: go to the primary parshala and then to school in my town, Saraswati Shishu Mandir. So that
[Guest]: was the only school in I think 10 kilometer vicinity of my village, where you used to
[Guest]: wear a school dress or a school uniform, right? So if from like, and we were the first like
[Guest]: my me and my sister were the first kids to basically wear uniform and go to a school.
[Guest]: So in that sense, the think about like the journey, or the trajectory or arc of that
[Guest]: journey, a lot of things didn't make sense then, and doesn't even make sense now. So
[Guest]: like, we didn't use to get newspapers in our village. So me and my sister used to walk
[Guest]: to the road where we used to get a rickshaw or some three wheeler or four wheeler to reach
[Guest]: to my school, which was three or four kilometers. And so when you used to wait at that spot
[Guest]: to get a rickshaw, there were lots of tea stalls. So what do you do? You just like either
[Guest]: play or you just try to flip newspapers and see. So I think the habit of reading newspapers
[Guest]: developed there. Then, like in the village, so my grandfather used to like what subscribers
[Guest]: of some magazine, I wouldn't say like, like a news magazine, but you know, some were sort
[Guest]: of like magazines related to your caste, some magazines related to religion. So what do
[Guest]: you do like in the morning or evening, you don't have TV, you play some time and you
[Guest]: just read these random stuff. So I think it opened a very, very like, so I know about
[Guest]: my caste, like, or what battles they are fighting, not because I experienced anything, but just
[Guest]: by reading through these things, right, like, those magazines are basically linking you
[Guest]: to some symbols, some moments of pride, some moments of discrimination. So you not only
[Guest]: understand you, your caste, your family, but also in this context and social relations,
[Guest]: who are the others, right? Like if you say you come from, so I come from Kurmi caste,
[Guest]: right? Now, where is Kurmi on the hierarchy? Who are like, above the hierarchy? Who are
[Guest]: the below the hierarchy? And like, at a young age, you are doing many of those things, right?
[Guest]: Like if you see some bad practices, it wasn't as if like I was resisting those practices.
[Guest]: Now I like 25 years, 30 years later, when I've read, I've grown and matured, I think
[Guest]: there was some things not right happening in front of my eyes. And I was part of those
[Guest]: very things. But then I didn't know I wasn't like wise enough, not that I'm now but that's
[Guest]: how things have. So does that answer or should you I'll kind of keep double clicking on different
[Amit Varma]: aspects of it. Like one, I didn't know there were magazines for castes. I mean, that's
[Guest]: quite a... So and this is like, there are lots of monthly or at least fortnightly magazines.
[Guest]: So at some point, either my grandfather or my father would have subscribed to this magazine,
[Guest]: right, which is Kurmi Kshatriya Jagran. And my grandfather used to just like, like at
[Guest]: his age in village, he had like done high school and everything. So he used to keep
[Guest]: a stack like so for very long time, we didn't use to sell or throw books. It's just like
[Guest]: you just stack them. And so all these magazines like of like 10 years or 15 years were just
[Guest]: stacked in one place. So I used to just pick up those things. And so Kurmi Kshatriya and
[Guest]: like I read about Shivaji at that time, because like, I think there was some linkage to being
[Guest]: Shivaji being Maratha Kumbhi and Kumbhi is basically a local term for Kurmi in Maharashtra.
[Guest]: So I learned about Indian history through the prism of my caste through that caste magazine.
[Guest]: That's insane. Like I knew about Shivaji belongs to my caste, right? So it's a moment of my,
[Amit Varma]: like our pride.
[Amit Varma]: It's fascinating. And are these magazines and serving a lacuna that is like, for example,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in a cosmopolitan world, you can say there is no need for caste, but not the
[Amit Varma]: whole world is cosmopolitan. In fact, a very small part of India even today is even within
[Amit Varma]: the cosmopolises as it were. So is it that they're serving a certain need that you feel
[Amit Varma]: that you belong in a particular community, you feel that tribal sense, which we are hardwired
[Guest]: to crave at different levels?
[Guest]: So I don't want to reduce it to basically some tribal sense that you need to belong
[Guest]: to identity or a community. I think they serve also lots of instrumental purposes. So those
[Guest]: magazines were like, of course, there would be an association and that association is
[Guest]: publishing those magazines. But if you and I are from that caste, we can also send our
[Guest]: articles and that would get published, right? So it was also a platform for many within
[Guest]: the community to express their literary interest, right? You can write stories or write history,
[Guest]: write poems. So that's one purpose. Second, through that magazine, you know, who among
[Guest]: your community is doing what. And communities or these identities have remained an access
[Guest]: point to a lot of things you won't be able to access. It just like becomes an easy reference
[Guest]: point, right? Like, either you belong to some village or town and you basically make a reference.
[Guest]: I'm from the same village, will you help me or like I'm from same caste, will you help
[Guest]: me? So that's the second instrumental reason. Third instrumental reason is I think those
[Guest]: magazines will also have a list of prospective brides and grooms, right? And given the marriages
[Guest]: have to happen within the community, you get a far wider range to make those selections.
[Guest]: There must be some sort of like identity issues that you want to be related to someone who
[Guest]: shares some history with you. But it's also wider instrumental purposes which these magazines
[Guest]: or associations serve and many of them have become defunct now or there has been a lot
[Guest]: of factionalism like our political parties are growing, caste associations are also growing.
[Guest]: But many of these caste associations have played a very, very important role in freedom
[Guest]: movement and pre-independence India, the Yadav Mahasabha and all of those organizations
[Guest]: were very important for certain reform measures that were taken during pre-independence India.
[Amit Varma]: And would these platforms of caste necessarily then also have a prism of caste, which is
[Amit Varma]: then internalized by all the people who are reading it? So say, for example, you belong
[Amit Varma]: to a particular caste, you get the magazine, you are anchored in a sense of history of
[Amit Varma]: where you stand in the grand scheme of things and all of that. You know that wherever you
[Amit Varma]: go, there'll be some people you can relate to, there might be these little networks that
[Amit Varma]: can help you out, all of that, you can publish your fiction or poetry there if you wish to.
[Amit Varma]: But do they all then carry this insidious prism of caste through which you forever see
[Amit Varma]: the world, you know, or is it more benign than that?
[Guest]: You could get locked up into this cell or prism. And you see most of the things happening
[Guest]: around you through the caste. And like, I don't want to blame the messenger that like,
[Guest]: of course, magazine is an instrument, and it might be doing that. But we see lots of
[Guest]: basically spillover of dissatisfaction, anger, protest happening on our streets for last
[Guest]: four or five years, somewhere it's a demand for Jat reservation, somewhere it's a demand
[Guest]: for Maratha reservation. So, caste identities continue to play a great role in our social
[Guest]: and political arena. And all of these mediums become instrument in mobilization of those
[Guest]: identities.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, it's fascinating that there are all these different social strands playing
[Amit Varma]: out, which then find expression in politics as well. For example, Akshay Mukul in his
[Amit Varma]: book about the Gita Press and in the episode he did with me as well spoke at great length
[Amit Varma]: about how, you know, political Hindutva should not take us by surprise, because those underpinnings
[Amit Varma]: were there in the culture forever, as, you know, Breitbart famously said, politics is
[Amit Varma]: downstream of culture. Yeah, and it is what it is. But I mean, this is, we could talk
[Amit Varma]: about this forever. So let's go on to your personal journey. And you mentioned earlier
[Amit Varma]: while giving your answer, another thread I want to double click on, where you said that
[Amit Varma]: if you read a Hindi newspaper and an English newspaper in the same city, they will be different
[Unknown]: from the kind of headlines they have, where they are placed, etc, etc. Can you give me
[Amit Varma]: an example of this to kind of make it concrete for me?
[Guest]: So very recent example, which I can remember was during the farmers agitation, when there
[Guest]: was a hoisting of like, basically flag around 26 January from the Red Fort. I think the
[Guest]: stance of English newspapers was much more to do with basically putting government on
[Guest]: the back foot, how it happened. And why, like, you know, farmers are angry and those kind
[Guest]: of things. And that's why there was a march, it's a failure of administration. The Hindi
[Guest]: newspapers, on the other hand, was basically saying, what has these farmers done? Desh hua
[Guest]: saram shaar, right? So basically, so putting the entire blame on unruly elements within
[Guest]: the farmers. So now you basically getting two very different pictures. On one hand,
[Guest]: it's a failure of administration and government not being able to hear the farmers voice.
[Guest]: Whereas in the Hindi newspapers, it's much more like this movement is not able to control
[Guest]: the unruly elements, and government must now take hard stand.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll go back to that earlier issue and come to a larger question, which this kind
[Amit Varma]: of brings to mind. Like I remember there was a recent controversy, when there was some
[Amit Varma]: marriage app, someone posted a screenshot on Twitter, and it allowed you to filter by
[Amit Varma]: caste. Now, this is, of course, shocking. But then the point is, that is it the app,
[Amit Varma]: which should be blamed for this? Or is it society? Because the app is doing this, because
[Amit Varma]: there is a demand for it. And this is how society is. And the larger question I'm then
[Amit Varma]: coming to is supposing you're a kid growing up, you're a kid growing up, and you have
[Amit Varma]: these magazines in your village or wherever you are, and you don't have much other access
[Amit Varma]: to information, and you adopt these prisms. This is all you know, you don't have any other
[Amit Varma]: way to tell right from wrong. And then you go to the city and let's say the farmer, farmer
[Amit Varma]: agitation happens. But the only access you have is to papers in your language. And that
[Amit Varma]: is a narrative that you get. And for all these reasons, without passing a value judgment,
[Amit Varma]: you are who you are. But are you responsible for who you are, you are shaped essentially
[Amit Varma]: by your environment, by everything you read while growing up, by the media that you read
[Amit Varma]: today, by the peers around you, who have grown up in with similar backgrounds and similar
[Amit Varma]: whatever. And, and the people who disagree with you will inevitably be English speaking
[Amit Varma]: people like myself, who will seem condescending and superior and know it all and cheering
[Amit Varma]: to you. And you go like WTF. So my question here is that how easy it is to stand in judgment
[Amit Varma]: over other people, especially in these times, when standing in judgment over other people
[Amit Varma]: helps us posture on social media, you know how virtuous we ourselves are. But, you know,
[Amit Varma]: should we just sit back a little bit, not to be so judgmental of people, but be judgmental
[Amit Varma]: of social trends, be judgmental of all these toxic forces within our society, like caste,
[Amit Varma]: like many other kinds of identity politics for that matter. But that people are complicated
[Amit Varma]: and that some of our discourse today could be getting corrupted by exactly this from
[Amit Varma]: all sides, where, you know, you're looking for human villains. While that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: maybe a mistake. I mean, I might have rambled a bit, but I'm just thinking aloud because
[Guest]: of it's a complex question. Being judgmental is easy. And we all basically and also virtue
[Guest]: signaling is easy. So these two tendencies is now overflowing. If you want to understand
[Guest]: something, learn from it, diagnose it and then offer solution that's going to take time.
[Guest]: And you can't do it if you are going to be judgmental to begin with. Right. So for example,
[Guest]: let's take this aspect of caste. Is caste inherently bad? I don't know. Like caste brings
[Guest]: certain values with it, which is bad, right? Hierarchy, oppression, tying you to a social
[Guest]: categories. All these things are bad about caste. But then caste as a form of solidarity,
[Guest]: especially those who have been at the bottom of hierarchy using those solidarity, like
[Guest]: overcome the oppression they have seen, like that's not inherently bad. Right. But at some
[Guest]: point, basically, it's a it's a cycle when it basically takes its course. At some point,
[Guest]: it's also going to have negative spillovers. So my job as an analyst or as a citizen of
[Guest]: this country is both first to understand when is caste being used as a privilege and when
[Guest]: is caste being used as a form to overcome barriers. And I should be able to distinguish
[Guest]: between those two. Right. And that distinction is important to say caste is good or bad.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, I'll voice a slight disagreement here where I just think it's fundamentally
[Amit Varma]: a problem. Any kind of categorization like this where like I think, you know, every individual
[Amit Varma]: should really be respected for what they are and all of us contain multitudes. So anything
[Amit Varma]: that reduces a person to a particular identity which they are born into is, I think, problematic
[Amit Varma]: and the positive aspect of it that you speak of is that, for example, what you're saying
[Amit Varma]: and it's true that an understanding of caste is what allows Dalits, for example, to come
[Amit Varma]: together and fight against that oppression. But the point is that oppression is there
[Amit Varma]: in the first place because caste is there in the first place. Why is that fighting necessary
[Amit Varma]: if there was if the caste system wasn't so entrenched and so oppressive, they wouldn't
[Amit Varma]: need to mobilize to fight against it and it would kind of therefore be irrelevant. So
[Amit Varma]: anything that furthers and perpetuates caste and there are different kinds of casteism,
[Amit Varma]: but anything that makes you think in those kind of categories itself is a problem and
[Amit Varma]: kind of needs to be thought about. And this is I think, just one example of caste, you
[Amit Varma]: can also, you know, get into these sort of reductive categories from the left, where
[Amit Varma]: you could say, oh, you're a cis het white male or whatever. And you immediately reduce
[Amit Varma]: someone who's incredibly complex to that. Or you could say that, oh, you're a black
[Amit Varma]: trans person. And you reduce someone who's very complex to one narrative of victimhood,
[Amit Varma]: which seems to carry inherent dangers to me and might even stop us from getting past all
[Amit Varma]: of these divisions and oppressions.
[Guest]: True, but should there have been no caste? Yes, we shouldn't, we won't be having this
[Guest]: kind of discussion. But human, should they be reduced? Should individuals be reduced
[Guest]: to these identities or these categories? No, they shouldn't be. But then these identities
[Guest]: and categories exist. And they will, like, I can't imagine a social formation where we
[Guest]: are not going to have these identities or categories. If it's not caste, it's going
[Guest]: to be color or rights. Like, it's easy to judge and virtue signaling, it's also easy
[Guest]: to categorize, right? So it's a inherent human tendency that we are going to categorize people
[Guest]: through something.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, that's very true. And I realized that just as you began, that it's easy at a normative
[Amit Varma]: level, at a level of how things should be to say that no caste is bad at that level.
[Amit Varma]: But if you look at a descriptive level, the point is, even if caste wasn't there, something
[Amit Varma]: else would have been there. Because A, we are hardwired for tribalism. And B, we are
[Amit Varma]: also hardwired to make up simple narratives that explain the world to us. And these two
[Amit Varma]: come together, and they feed into these kinds of sort of divisions. So let's kind of move
[Amit Varma]: on, you know, we've covered kind of, I think, 10 years right now, where you are going to
[Amit Varma]: the bus stop in your village, and you're wearing a uniform, which sets you apart from many
[Amit Varma]: other kids. Already, you're part of the elite, because you have a school uniform, and you're
[Amit Varma]: going to the school. So from there, how do the next sort of steps happen? Like, what
[Amit Varma]: is the evolution of the aspiration of Rahul Verma, for example, over the next 10-15 years?
[Amit Varma]: Like, what do you want to be at that time? And as life happens to you, and things happen,
[Amit Varma]: how does that evolve? Take me through a little bit of that sort of journey, both external
[Amit Varma]: and internal.
[Guest]: Okay, so I studied in that school till class fourth. And then my father, when he moved
[Guest]: to Lucknow from Kanpur, he's an engineer. So once he moved to Lucknow, you know, he
[Guest]: has a more settled life, he thought of getting us to Lucknow and study there. So he wanted
[Guest]: us to study in an English medium school. And you know, like in cities, you have entrance
[Guest]: process, where they interview, interview your parents and everything. So yeah, the first
[Guest]: comment was, you know, bachche toh English nahi bol pate hain. How will they survive
[Guest]: in this environment? And so of course, like any parent would have done, my father would
[Guest]: have pleaded that they are hardworking kids, they will...
[Amit Varma]: Hard work not Harvard.
[Guest]: They would do, okay, give them a chance. And so yeah, so slowly, we got into one school,
[Guest]: which you can think was on a borderline of, we went to Bharti Vidya Bhavan, which is good
[Guest]: English medium school. But then there are better English medium schools also, right?
[Guest]: So slowly, we moved to a different English school in two, three years, I think, then
[Guest]: the ambitions and aspirations slowly keep changing, right? You like, keep seeing new
[Guest]: things, you moving to a state capital. So just moving to a state capital in the village
[Guest]: was the aspiration. Once you move to the state capital, you slowly think of what you all
[Guest]: can become. You see, you meet some of your friends or their parents or colleagues of
[Guest]: your parents and you figure out, okay, this uncle is doing well in life, he has a bigger
[Guest]: house. So those kind of like, you know, I should also be thinking of becoming a civil
[Guest]: servant, IS officer or PCS officer, or those kind of things. And then, because I think,
[Guest]: like, by class six, seven, those fascinating aspects of ki, I will become a fighter pilot
[Guest]: or, you know, which is more sort of like a macho thing to do, those start taking much
[Guest]: more realistic shape. And you are also start realizing where is sort of like, not dignity,
[Guest]: but power, money, fame, and you think that these are the positions one should be unless
[Guest]: you play, you are driven by, say, you want to become army officer or you want to become
[Guest]: a cricketer or a Bollywood actor. So you take sort of like much realistic goals, okay, I
[Guest]: want to go to IIT or I want to be like those kind of things. And so I'm there in Lucknow,
[Guest]: did my high school, I was an intermediate, I realized I don't have fascination for either
[Guest]: engineering or medical. I didn't know what I want to do. But that time, you know, I think
[Guest]: TV journalism is just coming to age. And you're seeing lots of like, firebrand brave journalists
[Guest]: on TV asking tough questions. So I think I was getting a little bit fascinated by that.
[Guest]: And that's why my first email address is Rahul dot reporter. So that was the moment of fascination
[Guest]: to become a TV journalist, but then come to Delhi University to do my college that time
[Guest]: I also wanted to do journalism. Like, in fact, I chose BA program, because I thought, oh,
[Guest]: so newspapers have three elements. So news has three elements, that there are others,
[Guest]: but mainly three politics, there is a section on business and economy, and there is a section
[Guest]: on sports. So my sort of innocent mind, basically thought, okay, so why don't I do a course,
[Guest]: which basically teaches me both politics and economics, sports, I can manage that, right.
[Guest]: So so that's why I chose BA program. And later on, I realized that it was not a good decision.
[Guest]: My friends in the department or course asked me, you've come from Lucknow, you're doing
[Guest]: a BA pass course, why didn't you apply for honors courses and all those things. And that
[Guest]: like, I just didn't know. In fact, like when I went back home in my first or second year,
[Guest]: there was a relative sitting in the house with chatting with my father and asked me,
[Guest]: what you're doing? I said, I'm studying at Kirodimal College in my second year, he said,
[Guest]: that's okay. But what what are you doing? And I could later figure out that he wanted
[Guest]: to ask me, are you preparing for civil services or not? You've gone to Delhi, you're taking
[Guest]: a social science or humanities courses, you should be preparing for civil services exam.
[Guest]: And if you're not doing then you are, in some ways, not utilizing your time. But in my college
[Guest]: years, the good thing was that I, in each summer, I interned at different places. So
[Guest]: I worked at Indian Express office in Lucknow, the mentors there were really, really nice
[Guest]: and helpful. In a way, like, you know, at that age, I got bylines in the city edition,
[Guest]: the three pages, which comes with the main edition on every second day. Then I worked
[Guest]: as an intern in Aas Tak for 30 days, most of my time got spent in the sports section,
[Guest]: where my job was to watch India Australia match and make call like time locks to basically
[Guest]: edit the section where there was a four or six got hit or where there was a catch or
[Guest]: a bowl. So I love to get so in that sense, I would say I didn't learn a lot about journalism
[Guest]: there. But at least, you know, I'm watching test match five days in the Australia. Okay,
[Guest]: so through that three years working at different kind of news organizations, I realized my
[Guest]: interest actually is not in journalism, it's much more to understand politics. And I thought
[Guest]: the discussions which I had with some journalists, and like, it's not to do with any organization
[Guest]: or any particular person. But I thought like, perhaps it will take a much longer time in
[Guest]: journalism to develop the kind of understanding I want to have about politics. But it doesn't
[Guest]: mean that I had decided I want to do a political science PhD. But I got like, my fascination
[Guest]: for journalism after those three internships was over.
[Amit Varma]: I have also spent time doing brudge work in cricket. But if I had to sort of sit and watch
[Amit Varma]: matches and just do time codes for when to cut for for, you know, to capture a four,
[Amit Varma]: I think I might have kind of lost interest in journalism as well. And I can I can understand
[Amit Varma]: a certain fascination for politics that is there just in terms of the human drama of
[Amit Varma]: it. And that whole the whole morality play which is playing out and you know, it has
[Amit Varma]: all the characteristics of great drama, heroes, villains, tension, conflict, masala, all of
[Amit Varma]: that is there. But at some level, obviously, you're thinking of it as something more than
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, there is at some point a transition that happens where you're not just thinking
[Amit Varma]: of politics in terms of interesting stories, obviously, but as something deeper that can
[Amit Varma]: explain something about the country that, you know, that can be placed in particular
[Amit Varma]: context that reveals a certain amount of society, in other words, political science. So tell
[Amit Varma]: me, was that a gradual process? Or, you know, was there any kind of specific book or any
[Amit Varma]: kind of thinker you came across, which suddenly, you know,
[Guest]: Work in progress, Amit. I don't think I have figured out why I'm interested in politics
[Guest]: or political science for that matter. I think, and I'm happy this is a journey incomplete,
[Guest]: because the day I will figure out I will lose interest in it. Maybe I'm not saying I will
[Guest]: definitely. But I think you can call it passion or whatever, like, there is a search. And
[Guest]: I think that search for something is the drive, which is keeping me interested in politics
[Guest]: and political science. What I am searching for, I don't know. But of course, I can, you
[Guest]: know, make up statements, like, you know, now I know that modern India is a political
[Guest]: project, right? And it was a project conceived at the time of independence or during the
[Guest]: freedom movement. And, and I, in every sense, all what we know in political science, survival
[Guest]: of India as a democracy with so much of diversity with so much of poverty, illiteracy is sort
[Guest]: of like an exception is a puzzle. And so all of us, not all of us, but most of us, I hope,
[Guest]: who study Indian politics are trying to understand this enigma, or like, how are we surviving
[Guest]: amidst all the chaos? Why do we manage to do certain things? Right? Like, elections
[Guest]: in India, in some ways are the greatest show humankind sees every five years, right? Like
[Guest]: 800 million people participating, and producing a verdict or a mandate or a result is just
[Guest]: fascinating. Think of all the innovations our electoral system have gone through, or
[Guest]: people who were thinking about the import or were imagining India as a democracy, a
[Guest]: feudal society, a deeply hierarchical society, everyone illiterate, how like, how did they
[Guest]: think that we are going to like, you know, people are going to cast their vote thinking
[Guest]: of symbols, right? That illiterate people can't read that Amit Verma is contesting from
[Guest]: party X. So Amit has a symbol, teddy bear, right? And people know that Amit belongs to
[Guest]: teddy bear party, and so teddy bear gets the vote. So those kind of innovations, and there
[Guest]: are certain similar lacunas, like, we have more than 25 or 2800 parties registered in
[Guest]: the country today. And the lacuna or, or it's a foresight, I don't know, this is something
[Guest]: one needs to think about. So the reason we have so many political parties in India, because
[Guest]: registering a political party is really easy. But the Election Commission of India does
[Guest]: not have the power to deregister a party. And so there are many parties that are dead
[Guest]: or defunct, but they still, in the legal sense, still registered as a political party. Think
[Guest]: of it. And that's why like my fascination, passion, drive, whatever, like, whoever was
[Guest]: thinking about this, and I have spoken to people in election commission, former election
[Guest]: commissioners, and they've said they have written to law, Ministry and Law Commission
[Guest]: to basically give them the right to make certain amendments in People's Representation Act
[Guest]: and give them right to deregister a party. But then when they make this argument, when
[Guest]: they become thoughtful during that interview, they say, but I think it was some genius,
[Guest]: right, who thought that the Election Commission should not have the power to deregister. What
[Guest]: if the Election Commission is basically under the spell of the present regime or any regime
[Guest]: at that point? And basically, then you want to get all your opponent parties deregistered.
[Guest]: So it would have been a bad law in that sense. And so all of these questions, what was going
[Guest]: behind in making these laws or not making these laws? Like, if you read the Constituent
[Guest]: Assembly debates, and we talked about some of it during our last conversation, like,
[Guest]: each of those amendments that were raised, like, it's a fascinating document, and one
[Guest]: should read it, like, the kind of thought process that was going into the framers of
[Guest]: modern India, the realization some of them had about the depth and the breadth of this
[Guest]: country in every sense, like, basically, like, I don't think most of us who are on social
[Guest]: media and Twitter, like the kind of conversations we have today, which we think is a debate,
[Guest]: and we are living in a polarizing time is nonsensical. Think of those moments of 1947,
[Guest]: like, you know, partition happening, people are dying, there is a debate happening on
[Guest]: what should be the basis of citizenship. Like, that's the polarizing time, right? What we
[Guest]: are seeing is just a facade on social media. Think of that, like, 70-80 years ago, where
[Guest]: some people were arguing that, you know, the Constitution should begin in the name of God,
[Guest]: right? And then others are, you know, we can't have God. Some of those debates still exist.
[Guest]: But I think putting those debates in the context of 1940s, when many things are happening,
[Guest]: World War II had just ended, India didn't, like, we had seen 1942 famine, right? Like,
[Guest]: thousands of lakhs of people had died, partition happening. And I think, like, constructing
[Guest]: a nation at that point from 200 years of being a country subjugated by a colonial power,
[Guest]: those are fascinating moments from a political standpoint.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's crazy. And you don't know then what you know now. Like, I did an episode
[Amit Varma]: with Gyan Prakash who'd written the book on the emergency. And one of the key points he
[Amit Varma]: made was that, one, the emergency wasn't unconstitutional, that power was actually given to the state
[Amit Varma]: to be able to do what it did. And the reason that power was given, the reason that it was
[Amit Varma]: enshrined in the Constitution, and it was so centralized, was that at the time the Constitution
[Amit Varma]: was being drafted, the country was falling apart. There was violence everywhere. You
[Amit Varma]: could not assume that, you know, the center would hold, as it were. And therefore, the
[Amit Varma]: centralizing urge, and therefore, this mindset almost of another new colonial power in the
[Amit Varma]: making in the way that they got all the states together and all of that. But, you know, within
[Amit Varma]: that context, you understand what happened. But then the result of that centralizing urge
[Amit Varma]: is the emergency. The result of that strong center is so many things that are wrong with
[Amit Varma]: our politics today. And you were speaking about so many parties which don't exist. Have
[Amit Varma]: you heard of the Uttar Pradesh Mitak Sangh? No, I haven't. But it's possible that there
[Amit Varma]: is a party here. No, it's not a party. So, this is a story I love telling. I've forgotten
[Amit Varma]: the name of the original guy. But basically, in the 1960s, there was a farmer who was declared
[Amit Varma]: dead by his relatives, so his land could be taken away. So he was basically legally dead.
[Amit Varma]: And he tried to fight and obviously, the state wouldn't help him because there's no proof
[Amit Varma]: of his existence. And he formed the Uttar Pradesh Mitak Sangh. And for 27 years, he
[Amit Varma]: fought a long battle to be declared alive again. Among the things he did was, I think
[Amit Varma]: in the elections in the late 80s and 89, he stood against VP Singh and VP Singh's constituency
[Amit Varma]: because he said that if they register me, that will in a sense be the state acknowledging
[Amit Varma]: my presence. He also, I think, kidnapped the daughter of one of the people who had taken
[Amit Varma]: his property not to harm her in any way. But if the police arrested him, they would have
[Amit Varma]: to acknowledge that he existed. And this Uttar Pradesh Mitak Sangh had a membership of 10s
[Amit Varma]: of 1000s of people. And eventually, I think in 2001, he was finally declared alive.
[Guest]: Oh, that's interesting. I am hoping those 10,000 members were not all, most of them
[Guest]: were declared dead by the state. I think this is a like, in absolute numbers also, like
[Guest]: in proportionate terms not, but in absolute numbers, this is a kind of thing keep happening
[Guest]: in our country. These small things keep happening. But with the help of these small things, most
[Guest]: people like live their lifetime. Yeah. Right. Basically trying to guard their property,
[Guest]: trying to basically make sure whatever little inheritance they have is passed on to mostly
[Guest]: their sons, right? And protecting it from jealous neighbors or jealous relatives. That's
[Amit Varma]: all what most people do in their lifetimes. And not only were you interested in politics
[Amit Varma]: at the level of I want to understand this shit, but were you also interested in it at
[Amit Varma]: the level of I want to do this shit? That, you know, I vaguely remember that you mentioned
[Guest]: some kind of political career in the making. Now you're putting words in my mouth. I wouldn't
[Guest]: say that at different points in time, I haven't thought, oh, I should do this shit. Now, and
[Guest]: I have still not been able to figure out what would be the mode or method. Like there have
[Guest]: been moments in my lifetime, some one or two personal instances, but largely to do with
[Guest]: what was happening around us, right? And at that moment, you think, like, is sort of like
[Guest]: being an analyst of politics enough? Why not just like leave everything, jump the bad wagon,
[Guest]: join protest movements that were happening at that point of time, then you do go to some
[Guest]: of them spend a couple of hours and then you come back type. So that's what has happened
[Guest]: for most part of it. But I wouldn't say that I haven't thought of having a life in political
[Guest]: arena.
[Amit Varma]: So what stops you? Is it like the practicality of actually being able to be in a position
[Amit Varma]: to win anything in these times where the parties are arranged the way that they are, they are
[Amit Varma]: so centralized, psychofancy is so important. You know, it's not like the US where anyone
[Amit Varma]: can just stand for Congress or for the Senate. Or is it just that politics has become so
[Amit Varma]: unsavory that your idealism no longer feels like a thing?
[Guest]: So I think if I'll be like, realist here, the game of power everywhere is difficult,
[Guest]: and it will always be difficult. It's not easy in US. And it's not difficult in India.
[Guest]: Everyone can contest in India as they can contest in United States. Same way in US.
[Guest]: If you look at the wealth of people who win or pedigree of people who win is very different
[Guest]: for people who can contest. In the Indian case, so you can make these arguments that
[Guest]: parties are closed structures in India. So yes, in some senses, the mobility is limited.
[Guest]: But in US, you have two options. In India, in most states, there are eight to nine viable
[Guest]: parties, right? So you have more options to join. Elections are competitive in India,
[Guest]: and they're more competitive than other places. But in India, entry of politicians is easy.
[Guest]: If you look at all our parliaments and legislative assembly, half of the members are first timers.
[Guest]: Whereas in US, the electoral turnover is like very low, like 80 to 90% of congressmen win
[Guest]: their seats, or congresswomen win their seats. In India, more than half is new. So you have
[Guest]: more chance to basically try and win. So I wouldn't say it's the practicality of politics.
[Guest]: But I think the drive to be in the political arena is not that enough that I want to leave
[Guest]: what I'm doing at the moment. There may be a day where I think, you know, like, this
[Guest]: is enough. I don't think I have anything to contribute here. Why not break my head somewhere
[Guest]: else? Maybe I fail there also. But like, the drive to try is not at the moment.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and at least nobody will be able to say that he did not know what he was getting
[Amit Varma]: into. You have basically studied it in such depth. Take me now to your actual doing political
[Amit Varma]: science abroad and that kind of journey which took you to, you know, writing your first
[Guest]: book with Mr. Chhibber. So I, we spoke till I was in Kirurimal College.
[Guest]: There were certain things happened and we can talk about that at some point.
[Guest]: No, you're smiling now. Tell me now. So funny things like and on all of those
[Guest]: things basically shape you as a person. So when I joined Kirurimal College or Delhi University,
[Guest]: we were the first batch for whom the internal assessment procedure came in. Basically, you
[Guest]: will have a final exam of 75% and 25% would be graded internally, which will be comprised
[Guest]: of, say, a half yearly exam, some assignments and attendance. And somehow basically to cut
[Guest]: the long story short, my internal assessment marks for all subjects in my first year were
[Guest]: allocated zero. And so it was a three year fight where I've been from pillar to post
[Guest]: have asked help of student union president to like anything you can think of. And ultimately,
[Guest]: like the university refused and all those things happened. So some of my faculty members
[Guest]: helped me to go to a court. I filed a writ petition in Delhi High Court. I won that case
[Guest]: against Delhi University, they gave my marks back not in full, I should have got 76 out
[Guest]: of 100. But like or 67 out of 100. But even after like, second intervention of the court,
[Guest]: they only gave me, I think 62 or 64 still kept three marks and I don't know why, like,
[Guest]: what are you gaining out of it? But yeah, those were like so so that was a struggle.
[Guest]: So it basically delayed my admission into masters for a year because these court cases
[Guest]: and other things. But during that time, I got to travel many parts of North India, I
[Guest]: worked with a research organization which required me traveling. And so I traveled to
[Guest]: Rajasthan to Himachal to UP to MP, like different states, doing those surveys or helping the
[Guest]: survey team. I traveled on the bus floors just for fun. I'm not saying I didn't have
[Guest]: money to travel. It's like you like, like sitting on the top of the bus and traveling
[Guest]: Himachal or Uttarakhand, it's not legal, not nice. But then you like, you know, you see
[Guest]: things very differently. So that gap year was in that like, very helpful in knowing
[Guest]: different parts of the country. Then I got admission at Tata Institute of Social Sciences
[Guest]: here in Mumbai, I did my master's here. And the reason I basically applied I like, I would
[Guest]: not have got admission here, like, but the reason I applied because one of my professor
[Guest]: who helped me during that course, he said, apply to this. It's a good place. They also
[Guest]: have a research component, which you will like. Now many places in India might have
[Guest]: master's dissertation. But I think that was one of the first places development studies
[Guest]: at Tata Institute of Social Sciences, we started this like writing master's dissertation. This
[Guest]: was between 2007 to 9. And Bahujan Samaj Party had just one single handedly in UP. And so
[Guest]: I wrote my master's dissertation on the rise of VSP. So it was in ways like first foray
[Guest]: into political science research. And so yes, then the journey began. I also did my internship
[Guest]: during this at CSDS Centre for Study of Developing Societies in Delhi. I like the place. And
[Guest]: I think they also like my work. So they asked me, once you finish your master's come here
[Guest]: and work with us. So I worked at CSDS for two years on 2009 elections. And I was trained
[Guest]: under Yogendra Yadav, Professor Suhas Palshikar, Sanjay Kumar. So very early on getting trained
[Guest]: by these people, sort of like Yogendra used to say this, and I have copied it from him,
[Guest]: that in the musical tradition, you belong to Gharanas. In the research tradition, I
[Guest]: belong to the CSDS Lokniti Gharana, where we do empirical political science research.
[Guest]: And so yeah, during those years at CSDS, they also allowed me to, you know, while working
[Guest]: at CSDS pursue my MPhil at Delhi University, like both places are just like in a half kilometre
[Guest]: radius. So I used to go and attend my classes. And then I wrote my MPhil dissertation on
[Guest]: why does Indian states have different party systems. So you would see states like Kerala
[Guest]: or Tamil Nadu, where it's basically two party systems, but in a sense, like there are polar
[Guest]: party systems, right? There is a UDF, there is a LDF, there is a Dravidian pole and AIDMK
[Guest]: pole. And then you have states like UP and Bihar, where you have multi parties, four
[Guest]: or five, then you have states like Madhya Pradesh or Chhattisgarh, where you have only
[Guest]: two main parties, BJP and Congress. And then you had at that time, West Bengal or Gujarat,
[Guest]: Gujarat was still developing like a one party dominant state. And at that time, Bengal was
[Guest]: still the left ruled one party dominant state. So why does Indian states have these different
[Guest]: party system? Do I have an answer? No, but I like, you know, in Delhi University, MPhil,
[Guest]: you have to write a dissertation based only on secondary sources, no primary research
[Guest]: and all those things. But yeah, I do some historical analysis of why, you know, it's
[Guest]: a path dependent journey, it depends on what opposition came first and other things. Some
[Guest]: made up stuff, I still don't have one clear answer on that. But so slowly, I was basically
[Guest]: getting into the stream. And then at CSDS, when I was CSDS, I applied for, I was encouraged
[Guest]: by many people to apply for PhD in US. And luckily, I got admission at University of
[Guest]: California, Berkeley to work with many people. But yeah, like I, Pradeep Chipper was my primary
[Guest]: dissertation advisor. And so like in US, the way the course structure is that for first
[Guest]: three, four years, you just do your coursework and write your prospectus. And then you go
[Guest]: on to write your dissertation. For me, that took a long time for many reasons, one of
[Guest]: which was Pradeep and I somehow, like in 2014 or 2015, were discussing about, you know,
[Guest]: there is a long shadow of partition on Indian politics, there are certain issues and themes
[Guest]: which are reoccurring, and they keep emerging. And from there, like, you know, the conversations
[Guest]: basically took the shape, the conversations were very different from the book that finally
[Guest]: came out, which is that Indian politics is deeply ideological. And those ideological
[Guest]: conflicts have shaped the party system development post independence and voters sought them on
[Guest]: those ideological issues. And so, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And just to kind of put that in perspective for the listeners, there has been this common
[Amit Varma]: notion, which I share at a point in time, that the ideologies of left and right as we
[Amit Varma]: understand them in the worst world, rest of the world don't apply to India. Left and the
[Amit Varma]: right is a meaningless distinction here. And if you look at all our parties are pretty
[Amit Varma]: much left of center on economics and right of center on social issues, exactly the opposite
[Amit Varma]: of how someone like me who cares for individual rights would like it. And the point that Rahul
[Amit Varma]: and Mr. Chhibber made in their excellent book, and you should really listen to that episode,
[Amit Varma]: which I'll link from the show notes, is that there are ideological fault lines. It is not
[Amit Varma]: all identity politics, as many people say, but those ideological fault lines are different
[Amit Varma]: ones, not the paradigms that we are sort of used to in the left. Now, a couple of comments.
[Amit Varma]: One is at one point, he was speaking about the marks you actually got and you said 76
[Amit Varma]: or 67. And I will let the listeners know that just before this, we were kind of joking about
[Amit Varma]: all the 100% cutoffs in Delhi University for political science today. Because in our time,
[Amit Varma]: like in in both my 10th and 12th, in one of them, I got around 70. In another one, I got
[Amit Varma]: around 60. I don't even remember, it didn't even matter. And I think Rahul has the same
[Amit Varma]: approach as mine. But I guess, in a sense, that mistake that they made, you know, might
[Amit Varma]: have really helped you in the sense that it set you along this path where you travel on
[Amit Varma]: the roof of buses and all of that. And do you look at that and feel that maybe your
[Amit Varma]: life would have been different or your outlook would have been different had that not happened?
[Amit Varma]: How important was that gap year to you? Do you recommend in fact, that people take those
[Amit Varma]: kind of gap years because it's a tradition in the West, but not so much in India.
[Guest]: So it's definitely helpful to take gap years during your like, you know, college years
[Guest]: and I have a bad joke, it may be politically incorrect. But in a way, the way our education
[Guest]: to job lineup in Indian system or Indian culture is, as if, like one has to do a hajj, right?
[Guest]: sab kaam khatam karke fir hajj kar linge, naukri mil jayegi, shadi ho jayegi. Like,
[Guest]: you don't see these four, five, six years of like college education to job, and to finally
[Guest]: settling into something as a like progressive steps and steps of learning steps of making
[Guest]: mistakes, steps of figuring out. And so, like, if you do your BA, you finish your MBA, or
[Guest]: whatever you want to do, and then get into a job, you actually didn't give yourself time
[Guest]: to make a mistake. Right? And you actually didn't give yourself time to think there could
[Guest]: be other avenues or areas which might suit your talents more. Right? So when we choose
[Guest]: our undergraduates, not our choice most of the time, perhaps now the kids are doing it.
[Guest]: Even when I like didn't end up going to a engineering degree, my father is an engineer,
[Guest]: most of my school friends did engineering. In fact, just like you know, to just have
[Guest]: a good time because now everyone is have decided they have to write their engineering entrance
[Guest]: exam so they have joined some coaching. I have decided I won't do engineering, but I
[Guest]: have not got admission into Delhi University yet. So what do I do in those summer months,
[Guest]: I used to basically go to engineering coaching with them just to hang out like that after
[Guest]: the coaching is over, we will all go to have tea or something right some of those days.
[Guest]: And it was easy to come like if all everyone is writing their entrance exam, why am I not
[Guest]: writing right? So most of the time you do these things under family pressure under peer
[Guest]: pressure, you actually don't get time. It's not like as I told you, I was not making conscious
[Guest]: decision what I have to do. I just made a conscious decision based on my own abilities
[Guest]: that I'm not good for engineering degree. And I basically like came to Delhi University
[Guest]: thinking okay, I can do journalism, then I realized that's also not my field. So I think
[Guest]: gap year at some point is important. And especially if you can utilize it properly. And sometimes
[Guest]: it's like, perhaps at our stage, we need like six, eight months of gap time just to do nothing
[Guest]: and think what we have managed to do what like, you know, basically reflect deeply on
[Guest]: the course of next five, seven years, because we all are running against time, right? We
[Guest]: have to you to finish a volume that has been promised, you have something left over, you
[Guest]: have family to take care that there are lots of family obligations. And so in all of that
[Guest]: midst, taking those four or five months off or a year off was very helpful. I did many
[Guest]: things in that gap year between college and joining MA. And there were some good things
[Guest]: happen. So of course, this court case, but I also got a summer scholarship to study at
[Guest]: Cambridge for one month. That was fun first time flying international. Before that no
[Guest]: one in my immediate family had traveled. So I actually didn't bear your luggage would
[Guest]: be right. So I do like figure out so so those are the like, I remember I was in Himachal,
[Guest]: like, when my grandmother passed away, and I have this habit of not like looking at my
[Guest]: phone. So I used to keep my phone in the bag. There were like 30 calls when I checked in
[Guest]: the evening. And now you you are like, like college is not young kid, but you are in Himachal
[Guest]: in some remote village. And now you have to reach Lucknow. And that's I'm talking about
[Guest]: like 15 years ago, right. And so just figuring out the route and everything. So some of those
[Guest]: things teach you different things about life. I may have still perhaps gone to this politics
[Guest]: political science route, not because of that court case, but at very early age of my life,
[Guest]: I was introduced to high court, that cases are actually heard for just two to three minutes.
[Guest]: It's not like that, like, so I had seen that like you, your lawyer or the most of the time,
[Guest]: both lawyers are not even present in this like same time, right? That's the reason why
[Guest]: case gets postponed. So if two of us are lawyers of representing two parties, and you made
[Guest]: an excuse that I can't come today, it will get extended to another date, the next date
[Guest]: at minimum will be after two months. That's why Indian court cases basically takes up
[Guest]: years to get finished this like this simple case, right when my college is making an argument
[Guest]: showing you prove my college, my principal and vice principal saying they've written
[Guest]: many letters to the university that this kid got this much, I took like, you know, my lawyer
[Guest]: had to put so many papers to show that the college is giving what I deserve, like so
[Guest]: I used to debate and also I had so many work like certificates to show I am half intelligent
[Guest]: kid can get 60% marks, right? Otherwise, one of the argument which the lawyer from the
[Guest]: other party or the university made that the college is favoring this child. Right? So,
[Guest]: so this case also of a simple thing took eight or nine months, six or seven hearings.
[Amit Varma]: And that's crazy. And you know, you obviously had the means to fight it and the will to
[Amit Varma]: fight it and all of that.
[Guest]: I think so means and so will because I was not left with much option. Yeah, means because
[Guest]: my faculty at Kerala College were very supportive. Money I didn't have to pay because someone
[Guest]: actually fought this case pro bono, I had to only the legal fee in terms of paperwork
[Guest]: and other things. And so I also realize like, you know, that there are people who are willing
[Guest]: to do these things for others, like at a very, very minimal price. In fact, when I told my
[Guest]: father and some of my relatives that, you know, I'm going to court, some of them were
[Guest]: like, you should have told us, we would have gone to the university, got some babu, given
[Guest]: him 5000 rupees, he would have done this thing. But then you were like, you know, I was also
[Guest]: like taking high moral ground that you know, if I like if I can't, if I'm not going to
[Guest]: fight for in these injustices on my own, and take these easy routes, then what kind of
[Guest]: person I'm going to become. But you know, all those like,
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I think part of growing up is realizing that there are too many injustices and you
[Amit Varma]: can't fight them all. But you know, just going back to the gap year thing, I think what is
[Amit Varma]: more appealing than a gap year is a gap year mindset. Like, I think you should always leave
[Amit Varma]: open the opportunity for serendipity to happen to you. And if we just follow this structured
[Amit Varma]: path, ki 10th karenge, 12th karenge, engineering karenge, MBA karenge, job le lenge and then
[Amit Varma]: before you know it, the decades have passed, and nothing has happened and you haven't grown.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, and this is literally the seen in the unseen, because what is seen is that
[Amit Varma]: path that you chose for yourself and you went down on and what is unseen is all the other
[Amit Varma]: things that could have happened, including on sort of the top of the bus. Now, you spoke
[Amit Varma]: earlier about at different points, like, you know, when you spoke about your master's dissertation,
[Amit Varma]: you said that, okay, you know, these were the questions you asked, but you're still
[Amit Varma]: not sure of the answer. But you put quote unquote, some made up stuff. And earlier also,
[Amit Varma]: when I asked you about your attraction to politics, you said something to the effect
[Amit Varma]: of there's no concrete reason, but I can make up something for you, if you'd like. Now,
[Amit Varma]: it strikes me that when one is in academics, in a sense, you're putting yourself in the
[Amit Varma]: business of making sense of the world, or whatever little aspect of the world that you're
[Amit Varma]: focusing on. And therefore, your incentives go towards finding answers, even when there
[Amit Varma]: are none of building narratives, even when you know that those narratives are necessarily
[Amit Varma]: simple, because otherwise, you know, why are you there? What are you doing, you have to
[Amit Varma]: also, not just justify your existence in that field, but also justify to yourself, the choice
[Amit Varma]: that you made doing this, you know, just for your own self esteem, that no, I am not useless.
[Amit Varma]: I have asked this question, I will find the answer to it. You know, and is that a danger
[Amit Varma]: that you kind of find about, you know, do you have to warn yourself against overthinking
[Amit Varma]: something or about getting attracted to a particular theory? Because, you know, it seems
[Amit Varma]: so attractive, but is it the right one? And in your work, of course, as I have seen, there's
[Amit Varma]: just tremendous rigor. And I'm going to ask you about that as well shortly. So has that
[Amit Varma]: been a mindset that you've fought with? Because, you know, the lazy way out is to make a theory,
[Amit Varma]: make a narrative, find evidence to support it, make an argument. You were a debater also,
[Guest]: so no doubt you argued both sides of the same issue. So what are your thoughts on that?
[Guest]: So I think, let me say a few things, and then we'll try to round up what all of this means.
[Guest]: And it may be very different for different people in this field. A lot of people, like
[Guest]: I think their focus is to understand the world and explain the world to people. I think for
[Guest]: me, while this is, of course, an important thing, I want to understand myself through
[Guest]: this process of understanding politics and world. And let me give you an example. So
[Guest]: like I knew a friend during college years, and when I was in the US, they also moved
[Guest]: to San Francisco. And so I just like, you know, and we like were acquaintances, not
[Guest]: great friends. Like both of us liked hanging out with each other. And so when I called
[Guest]: her, I said, like, let's meet. She was like, you know, but and I said, like, come over
[Guest]: a couple of my friends will also be there. And she was like, you know, but all your friends
[Guest]: are PhD and I don't do any of this thing. What will I talk? And I said, I don't know.
[Guest]: But I think like, why the reason I hang out with you is that you also have a passion and
[Guest]: her passion was running. She used to run every day, like 20 kilometers, right? And the whole
[Guest]: life was organized around running, which is what to eat, when to sleep, what to drink,
[Guest]: what not to drink. Like, so I said, like, you have a passion for running and your everything
[Guest]: is organized around that. I have passion for elections and politics. Like my life is actually
[Guest]: also organized around like, I know 2024 election, I'll be busy. Not busy in terms of like, it's
[Guest]: just I will be occupied, right? Maybe wearing kurta pajama and giving bhashans. But you
[Guest]: know, so now I have to think backwards, that okay, so if 2024 is gone, I can't do anything.
[Guest]: Then in next two years, this is what my plan is, of course, none of them will be. But then
[Guest]: you plan, right? So, so I'm passionate about politics and elections. And it is more to
[Guest]: do with understanding myself, then to understanding and explaining things to others. Second, I
[Guest]: know, like, the theories or the narratives that I offer is my like representation, and
[Guest]: my thinking at the current moment, with my best sort of like knowledge gathering exercise.
[Guest]: But I'm not going to sort of like, put all my money on the theory that I'm saying today,
[Guest]: because new facts will emerge. And my theory or thinking should change based on the new
[Guest]: facts that are emerging. So I have and this is not again a virtue signaling that I'm being,
[Guest]: you know, open to sort of like, the idea is very clear. It keeps me much more sane. If
[Guest]: I leave the room open for basically me being wrong. If I'm going to stick to any theory
[Guest]: or thought and those kind of things, I'll be basically making myself insecure. And especially
[Guest]: in the world of writing academia, this keeps happening, you will see five criticisms like
[Guest]: you write newspaper articles, there are 10 comments, it's like stakes are very small
[Guest]: in this game, right? So everyone is going after everyone, they will say a few things,
[Guest]: one or two nice things in front of you, but 10 things to your acquaintances and 100 things
[Guest]: to other people. So I'm like, you know, like, for example, on that, I know, like the ideology,
[Guest]: like the arguments we made in, like the book on ideology is only scratching the surface,
[Guest]: right? There is much more happening, half it is being made sense through data, something
[Guest]: through other things. And to say that we have now mapped out 100 years of ideological conflict
[Guest]: in Indian politics is basically making a fool of myself. And I would rather say incomplete
[Guest]: things and know that those things are incomplete than saying that I for sure know the answer.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's very wisely said. There's a phrase that a friend shared with me, I forget who
[Amit Varma]: maybe Pranay Kutasane, somebody in policy, and the phrase was strong opinions weakly
[Amit Varma]: held. I really like that as a way of kind of thinking about the world and about the
[Amit Varma]: things that I am unwavering in and the things that I am open to, that the way I define it
[Amit Varma]: is that I am unwavering and unflinching when it comes to values, you know, valuing individual
[Amit Varma]: rights or freedom or whatever. But when it comes to facts, or a view of why things happen
[Amit Varma]: the way they do, and so on, I'm open to evidence, you know, tomorrow, I might believe something
[Amit Varma]: differently from what I believe today, but my values will be the same. And those will
[Amit Varma]: always kind of be my guiding light. Earlier, you had sort of spoken about the CSDS Lokniti
[Amit Varma]: Gharana, as it were, which I presume, Yogendra Yadavji is also a fellow traveler on. Tell
[Amit Varma]: me a little bit about this Gharana.
[Guest]: So this started way back in 1960s, one of the new social science research institutes,
[Guest]: and was started by Rajni Kothari and his fellow travelers in 1960s and sort of like very unorthodox
[Guest]: way of doing things, the stories that I've heard about.
[Amit Varma]: And Mr. Kothari was apparently, I mean, I've read a book of his on caste and Indian politics
[Guest]: and it's just a wonderful book. Yeah, yeah. So sharp.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah. So, so, so it started with like people like Rajni Kothari and slowly Ashish
[Guest]: Nandy and Dhirubhai Seth and Bashiruddin Ahmed and many of these people joined and the stories
[Guest]: I have heard is like, you know, those were the days when like, you know, people used
[Guest]: to have like play bridge or chess or cigar or pipe in office.
[Guest]: And so it was basically like creating a kind of an academy club, right, where you come
[Guest]: to do your thing. It was not a Sarkari institution, you have to come at 10, leave at five, like,
[Guest]: you know, people are sitting on Friday, so they're sitting till midnight and having debates
[Guest]: and talking about those things. So, and they did like Kothari was in a way, also got trained
[Guest]: in Michigan, in behavioral political science that was emerging then in 1960s. So with India
[Guest]: conducted, CSDS conducted its first national election studies during 1967, and then 71.
[Guest]: And some like, you know, very influential books were produced by this set of scholars.
[Guest]: And slowly, CSDS got diversified into doing many things. But the election studies program
[Guest]: got halted during the emergency and other things, mostly because I think the intellectual
[Guest]: orientation of these scholars changed and they were much more worried about what was
[Guest]: happening to the state and to democracy. So that's why like Kothari in 70s is writing
[Guest]: state against democracy kind of books or in search of humane order, right. So, so things
[Guest]: got changed. But then at like one corner of his heart, it must have been there that we
[Guest]: need to revive it. So then I think they met or Yogendra Yadav in early 90s invited him
[Guest]: to give a presentation at CSDS and then asked him to join CSDS. So then Yogendra Yadav started
[Guest]: Lok Niti 95, revived the tradition of election polling. So in some ways, outside the developed
[Guest]: world, India hosts one of the longest series of election survey data conducted by a Lok
[Guest]: Niti group of scholars. So it's a network of scholars across the country in many state
[Guest]: or central universities who conduct these surveys and trying to make sense of Indian
[Guest]: politics through the prism of voters what they are doing. Of course, there are limitations
[Guest]: even there. And I think like the best thing I at least learned from that Gharana tradition,
[Guest]: whatever everyone thinks is basically be open to the limitations of what you are doing.
[Guest]: And it's good, right? Like makes you know that you don't have to basically, you know,
[Guest]: put your life on every damn theory you speak or your ego on everything you say. But it's
[Guest]: not to say that, don't be rigorous, say anything that comes to first thought, like, think deeply,
[Guest]: research a topic, think of bigger questions, think of important questions, but don't make
[Guest]: it an ego that, oh, I argued this. And so it must be true every time, every context.
[Guest]: So I think I learned and mistake is very normal part of research, right? When we are conducting
[Guest]: this humongous national election survey, those questionnaires are being did like translated
[Guest]: in 18 languages. There are places now I think that problem of electricity and internet is
[Guest]: not there. But when I was in 2009, like I have heard stories, how do I download your
[Guest]: questionnaire and translate it? Right in like places, I'm not talking about like some rural
[Guest]: village in Chhattisgarh. This used to be the case in even many state capitals and central
[Guest]: universities that internet is not working and all those things. So, so you like you
[Guest]: understand like, at such a young age, I got an opportunity to not just see the masters,
[Guest]: but learn from the masters, work with them was like, for me, like, I feel fortunate and
[Guest]: lucky.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And speaking of no internet or no electricity, I mean, there is some kind of cold crisis
[Amit Varma]: going on in India right now, right? Some friend of mine from Bangalore was just complaining
[Amit Varma]: today morning ki yaar you know, do ghante se bijli nahi aayi hai and I was like do ghante
[Amit Varma]: how are you even living? Would it would it then be fair to paraphrase this approach by
[Amit Varma]: saying that there is no need for you to try to come up with definitive answers. What you
[Amit Varma]: want to do is either expand the scope of the discourse or sharpen some aspect of it?
[Guest]: Yes, both. Both. And that should be our aim, right? I think right now, if if you like give
[Guest]: you a medical analogy, to figure out what the diagnosis should be, you need to know
[Guest]: the actual point where the disease is and the surgery or whatever performance has to
[Guest]: be done. And if you have seen all those medical shows on Netflix and other places, like those
[Guest]: guys carry out lots of tests to figure out what the actually the problem is, right? So
[Guest]: in our world, which is much more complex, everything is a variable changing so rapidly.
[Guest]: And most of the things we have not even like studied descriptively or sort of like, you
[Guest]: know, have some sense of it. And then thinking that we can have a definitive theory of something
[Guest]: is a misnomer to begin with, like, perhaps 10, 15, 20, 30 years down the line, if we
[Guest]: collect lots of information about various aspects of things, perhaps our next generation
[Guest]: will be able to join dots and see something about about what is like come up with more
[Guest]: definitive theory. And so just to give you an example, I think the US political science
[Guest]: is at a much more advanced stage. And they are having, like now answering much more narrower
[Guest]: questions with much more certainty is because the base knowledge on certain things is a
[Guest]: lot. They have records of each individual Congress member voting on each bill that has
[Guest]: been tabled in the house. We don't. So they have a whole field of study of Congress, a
[Guest]: sub-discipline within the US political science. We don't have a sub-discipline of Parliament
[Guest]: and Legislative Assemblies. We don't have even like now for last three parliaments we
[Guest]: have attendance record to begin with and number of debates they are participating. We don't
[Guest]: know what was the attendance record in 1970s and 80s. So our data gathering exercise is
[Guest]: less, not much has been written about many aspects of things and so that so at our stage
[Guest]: we have to have like broad description of things and trying to get basically the perimeter
[Guest]: right and then go for the bullseye. At the moment if you can basically be in that radius
[Amit Varma]: that's fair. Yeah and I like what you said earlier about joining dots. I mean I use that
[Amit Varma]: metaphor myself a lot. You know I wrote a column once on the importance of reading where
[Amit Varma]: I said was how where my basic argument was look we make sense of the world by joining
[Amit Varma]: dots and the more dots we have the more high definition our picture will be and I guess
[Amit Varma]: you could argue that the state of political science in India is at a place where collecting
[Amit Varma]: dots is more important and you know the better pictures will emerge later but right now it's
[Amit Varma]: a collecting of dots, collecting of data, just understanding that which is kind of important.
[Amit Varma]: On the subject of reading I'm also kind of curious about that because you know earlier
[Amit Varma]: before we started this conversation we were chatting about the book of another person
[Amit Varma]: who of course we won't name but you mentioned that your feeling was that that person who's
[Amit Varma]: written a book with many many footnotes and all of that hadn't read enough of the literature
[Amit Varma]: in the subject. Now what I've noticed from your work both in your book and otherwise
[Amit Varma]: is that you clearly you read a lot. You're obsessed with gathering your own dots to make
[Amit Varma]: sense of what your field is. How do you manage to do that because and again a subject we've
[Amit Varma]: discussed given how boring academic language can sometimes be. Many academic texts are
[Amit Varma]: just written in this turgid prose that are really hard to go through but it's a part
[Amit Varma]: of your work to actually go through that and to go through many many books like that. So
[Amit Varma]: how have you built this reading habit? Was it hard work? Is it easier now? Is there a
[Amit Varma]: sort of a discipline to it? And how do you then kind of do knowledge management of figuring
[Amit Varma]: out you know how to assimilate the information and retain it and categorize it and make sense
[Guest]: of it? So I'll be honest with you in any book and including mine like if I have 100 citations
[Guest]: it doesn't mean I have read all 100. And not in the same like even if I've read say 70
[Guest]: some have been skimmed through some through abstract some through like pinpointed so it's
[Guest]: not humanly possible to read it but you do that exercise for two reasons. First knowledge
[Guest]: generation is a cumulative exercise which means that there is already like some dots
[Guest]: that are already existing and if you want you like and this is just like you know self
[Guest]: vested interest if you want your work to be acknowledged like a dot you need to refer
[Guest]: to all the dots that is possible I'm not saying like you won't be able to manage it many times
[Guest]: you are going to miss it but then if you miss important I'm not saying like refer to every
[Guest]: damn work in that area but if you are missing important work in your area it means that
[Guest]: you have not done due diligence and which means your question and your answer would
[Guest]: not be sharp enough because there is already a body of work that exists in your area you
[Guest]: should do the due diligence for your own sake and also for basically adding to this collective
[Guest]: exercise of knowledge generation and two I don't think so some readings are always done
[Guest]: for a particular research project right which you like you have to just cite so because
[Guest]: you are making a claim and that claim needs to have either some primary evidence or you
[Guest]: say okay Amit argued this and I'm referring Amit to this right so I'll like if I had this
[Guest]: sentence and I could think of or somebody tells me you know Amit has like so you you
[Guest]: do become aware of what is happening on a research project who else is working on what
[Guest]: different angles they are coming from right so sometimes those citations are just okay
[Guest]: on India there is a work by Amit I don't even perhaps read Amit's book this is not good
[Guest]: I'm not saying one should do it but most often we do these things there are a lot of things
[Guest]: you just keep reading and you have to develop a habit of reading either on like you know
[Guest]: devise a time of day that you know this one hour two hour so I generally try to not that
[Guest]: I stick to it very dearly but I like I don't like to have meetings in first half of the
[Guest]: day that I want to just like read flip over write something and in second half I think
[Guest]: after lunch I'm useless so why not like have all the meetings so I try to follow this schedule
[Guest]: as much as I can but then there are sometimes I'm not able to do so a lot of like information
[Guest]: or like this kind of knowing what work is happening in your area is part of your job
[Guest]: you need to know who is working of course you would need know more about the subjects
[Guest]: you are interested in so for example like this cold crisis it's not an in interest of
[Guest]: mine I know there is some crisis in fact like people asked me to refer to someone who they
[Guest]: can talk and quote about this idea but I didn't try to find out what's happening but if there
[Guest]: was a crisis in say Congress party or some state politics I would definitely like you
[Guest]: know Google it I have not yet tried to Google what has happened in Jhariya due to which
[Guest]: a lot of you know like electricity in many of our metros have gone down yeah I'm certain
[Amit Varma]: though that our Prime Minister would blame the cold crisis on the Congress party in which
[Amit Varma]: case you'll have to quickly in great panic dive in to see that is really the case so
[Amit Varma]: before we go in for the break and after the break of course we'll talk about both your
[Amit Varma]: book and the project that you're working on now and we'll talk about Indian politics in
[Amit Varma]: great detail and get down and dirty but a final sort of question about your journey
[Amit Varma]: which has always interested me because looking back I can see how this part of my journey
[Amit Varma]: was kind of fuzzy till it kind of gradually fell into place which is that when we are
[Amit Varma]: growing up we are just taking in influences from here and there by osmosis completely
[Amit Varma]: at random not really thinking things through and the prism through which we view the world
[Amit Varma]: is kind of random like that and it's only over a period of time that you actually sort
[Amit Varma]: of start thinking about things and reading books and discovering thinkers and forming
[Amit Varma]: a prism through which the world makes sense to you you know for example my prism as I
[Amit Varma]: said is largely now kind of based on values and sort of derives from there but it took
[Amit Varma]: me a long time to kind of get there a lot of my thinking when I was in my teens or early
[Amit Varma]: to mid 20s and all of that was very fuzzy and very wrong in fact in a sense I'm thankful
[Amit Varma]: that there was no social media back then because I might have done all kinds of random posturing
[Amit Varma]: and virtue signaling and hardened myself into certain ways of thinking by having publicly
[Amit Varma]: taken a position on that which is you know a tangential question that do you feel that's
[Amit Varma]: a danger today but my main question here is that in your case are you able to look back
[Amit Varma]: and say that these are the books or these are the thinkers which shaped me which are
[Amit Varma]: foundational in some way like of course I would imagine that the experience at CSDS
[Amit Varma]: and being part of that Gharana would have shaped you in terms of methodology and all
[Amit Varma]: of those things but just in terms of the way that you look at the world the values that
[Amit Varma]: have kind of formed you or that you have formed for yourself what are those influences?
[Amit Varma]: That would be hard to pinpoint.
[Guest]: No I don't even want you to make up an answer.
[Guest]: So I don't think the influences can only be books of famous people and thought processes
[Guest]: you know sometimes like I think I like I learned about like one principle of equality and Marxism
[Guest]: from my father which was you know I remember like we had just moved to Lucknow it was hot
[Guest]: I was sitting in like me and my sister were playing in cooler not studying all day and
[Guest]: then there was some work happening on the road and perhaps my father was in anger we
[Guest]: were not studying or something and and he could have like just said that why you guys
[Guest]: are sort of like wasting your time and playing not studying but his reference look at people
[Guest]: outside working in such humid like such bad condition with no clothes on their shoulders
[Guest]: and you guys have got these privileges and and just chilling right so you know and and
[Guest]: so if I remember that sentence like from 25 years like of my life it means that had a
[Guest]: very very deep influence on me like similarly some of the comments my grandfather may have
[Guest]: made on caste or against a dramatical system has shaped up my thinking about caste that
[Guest]: oh there are there is a hierarchy there are some people on top and they have shaped the
[Guest]: system or the society of course like reading books and people have opened up not just like
[Guest]: ideas in terms of like just writing right some people you read flows like a river it's
[Guest]: beautiful right like so about aesthetics like oh it's like I think like some of the arguments
[Guest]: and especially early work by Pratap his book a burden of democracy I think was really good
[Guest]: Rajni Kothari you mentioned like his writings politics in India the articles on you know
[Guest]: the congress system and others were political science is very influential Myron Weiner his
[Guest]: work was really good lots of writings in fiction especially Hindi fiction Raag Darbari by Shilal
[Guest]: Shukla, Muradahiya by Dr. Tulsi Ram, writings by Manto, Shivani, the satire genre of Harishankar
[Guest]: Parsai and political satires by him like I've enjoyed them and this may be my weakness I'm
[Guest]: not able to identify what might be like this is perhaps the reason that I need to sort
[Guest]: of like you know now take a sort of like gap year and think what of what these things have
[Guest]: affected me and in what ways like just going to new places seeing those things have shaped
[Guest]: me as a person the successes and the failures and meeting people and talking to people but
[Guest]: I have not been reflective enough of those things and how they are shaping me it seems
[Guest]: like I'm basically growing up every day but I don't know what are the factors or forces
[Amit Varma]: that are shaping me in that journey yeah that's a profound point and I sometimes wonder as
[Amit Varma]: well that are my only reflective moments those moments when I reflect about being reflective
[Amit Varma]: rather than actually something practical and then and even in reflection there is a danger
[Amit Varma]: of then constructing a narrative about yourself to make yourself look good to yourself or
[Amit Varma]: to explain something that has happened that is like the world itself complex and may not
[Amit Varma]: and necessarily conform to a simple narrative so let's take a quick commercial break and
[Amit Varma]: after we come back from the break let's get down and dirty and talk about the subject
[Amit Varma]: that you are so passionate about Indian politics long before I was a podcaster I was a writer
[Amit Varma]: in fact chances are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut
[Amit Varma]: which was active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time I love
[Amit Varma]: the freedom the form gave me and I feel I was shaped by it in many ways I exercise my
[Amit Varma]: writing muscle every day and was forced to think about many different things because
[Amit Varma]: I wrote about many different things well that phase in my life ended for various reasons
[Amit Varma]: and now it is time to revive it only now I'm doing it through a newsletter I have started
[Amit Varma]: the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com where I will write regularly about whatever
[Amit Varma]: catches my fancy I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about
[Amit Varma]: much else so please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe it is free once you sign up
[Amit Varma]: each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox you don't need to go
[Amit Varma]: anywhere so subscribe now for free the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: thank you welcome back to the scene in the unseen I'm chatting with my good friend Rahul
[Amit Varma]: Verma about about all his work in political science understanding Indian politics and
[Amit Varma]: in the one and a half hours before the break we spoke about his fascinating personal journey
[Amit Varma]: and what brought him to the point where he's actually writing a book about this great passion
[Amit Varma]: of his and when we first met and did the episode I was really struck by it because not only
[Amit Varma]: are you challenging myths held by a lot of people but you were challenging one of my
[Amit Varma]: beliefs and my belief to put it in sanshipt as it were is that I understood ideologies
[Amit Varma]: as being those ideologies of the West left right this that and in India sub-identity
[Amit Varma]: politics are key according to what is your caste what is your interest group all of that
[Amit Varma]: but your book convinced me that I need to consider a new way of thinking about it and
[Amit Varma]: look at it in a whole new way now we've done an entire episode on this which I'll link
[Amit Varma]: from the show notes but in brief can you tell me about your thesis and what are the ideological
[Amit Varma]: fault lines along which you know Indian politics has played out over the last few decades thank
[Guest]: you Amit for mentioning that book again and again and saying it challenged some of your
[Guest]: belief and it gave you a new way of thinking about it so very kind of you as I like have
[Guest]: been saying you know I don't think the book offers a complete picture of ideological conflict
[Guest]: that might be happening in India but it makes an important attempt to understand how Indian
[Guest]: politics has been shaped over 20th century so the starting point as you said we also
[Guest]: held the same view that Indian politics can't be looked into the Western notions of left
[Guest]: and right and so when Pradeep and I began thinking about this book so the first thought
[Guest]: was that you know there are certain recurring themes in Indian politics and so from there
[Guest]: on we started researching on what those themes were and it also needed us to figure out why
[Guest]: the Western left and right makes sense for those countries so the book in short makes
[Guest]: four or five argument first that the Western left and right notion or in West Europe had
[Guest]: a historical context the Western Europe underwent a series of things reformation, renaissance,
[Guest]: industrial revolution that produced certain cleavages in those societies and the ideological
[Guest]: conflict in those societies then were shaped on those cleavages whether it was around labor
[Guest]: versus capital whether it was around church versus state center versus periphery rural
[Guest]: versus urban so those were the cleavages that shape Western Europe now coming to countries
[Guest]: like India we never underwent those historical experiences right we never had an industrial
[Guest]: revolution in some senses most of the third world became an independent nation state overnight
[Guest]: from a colony right so the process of nation building and state building which took many
[Guest]: centuries in West Europe happened in a span of few years in countries like India I'm not
[Guest]: saying it like the process got completed but both coincided and was happening simultaneously
[Guest]: so once you start reading or referring to the documents from a freedom movement we know
[Guest]: that there were certain axes on which our founding fathers and there were only few women
[Guest]: in the constituent assemblies that were debating about these things so think of going back
[Guest]: to say 1909 modern amendment reforms or 1919 modern gave chance for reforms you would be
[Guest]: surprised to know certain things like Hindu Mahasabha and Muslim League are being born
[Guest]: in same time and if I remember correctly it's the same year of 1906 right before modern
[Guest]: amendment reforms because these groups what they were doing they were making certain representation
[Guest]: to the British government right and those representations were of course like around
[Guest]: the ideas of religion and caste and other things and so once you read the entire gamut
[Guest]: of these documents till the constituent assembly debates certain things become very very clear
[Guest]: and it also becomes very very clear that many of the debates we are having now the cow protection
[Guest]: or the role of God in society all those were debates were very much present at that time
[Guest]: or the reservation debates so when we read those documents two things basically became
[Guest]: clear to us the first debate was happening on what should be the role of state in the
[Guest]: society which we call as politics of statism and our reading of the text basically guided
[Guest]: us to important works that has been written in the subcontinent over centuries right because
[Guest]: those were the basis on which like people were drawing references to so Ramayan, Mahabharat
[Guest]: writings in the Islamic world or among the Muslim communities or Jains and Buddhism which
[Guest]: was in direct contrast to the political thinking in West Europe which was about the state-society
[Guest]: relationship in our Indic political thinking the idea was that state is subservient to
[Guest]: society in a way that society is ontologically prior to the state and the role of the state
[Guest]: is to protect the social order right so that becomes the first set of debates and I can
[Guest]: expand on it a bit more the second set of debate was that once India becomes a nation
[Guest]: state and independent country how are we going to bring diverse groups into the mainstream
[Guest]: of body politic right so there was an agreement or a consensus that we have to get everyone
[Guest]: on board right there are communities that have been oppressed for thousands of years
[Guest]: but we need to give them some scale not just of respectability but also bring into the
[Guest]: mainstream so but what would be the modes and methods of bringing them into the body
[Guest]: politic was a matter of contention was a matter of debate are we going to give them reservation
[Guest]: if we are going to give them reservation is religion or caste going to be that basis right
[Guest]: so that becomes a whole set of debates is India going to be a country which will reflect
[Guest]: Hindu ethos or are we going to have a multicultural secular ethos we also knew that our principle
[Guest]: of secularism can't be like a Western European country where there was a fight between church
[Guest]: and state India never had that fight right but the idea was that it's also deeply religious
[Guest]: country so secularism in our country would not be a separation of church and state but
[Guest]: basically the state playing a equidistant role from all religious fears and activities
[Guest]: so that became the first set of like one set of debates whom we call as politics of recognition
[Guest]: the second one was one politics of statism are we going to interfere in marriage norms
[Guest]: going back to the big debate within the Congress party between the moderates and extremists
[Guest]: was on lowering of marriage age and whether allowing widows to remarry or not so inter
[Guest]: caste marriages and those kind of things related to that was basically like all the debates
[Guest]: on Hindu code bill giving inheritance rights and redistribution of private property so
[Guest]: if you think of those debates you could clearly see there were people like Jawaharlal Nehru
[Guest]: and Dr. Ambedkar who were basically making a case that we are going to use the levers
[Guest]: of the state to remake the society and then there were people of course there were people
[Guest]: on extreme end but there were people like Gandhi who thought that states intervention
[Guest]: in society is violent is a violent act and so for example Gandhi also agreed that you
[Guest]: know the condition of Harijans or Dalits is not good and we need to do certain things
[Guest]: to you know uplift them but Ambedkar's solution was lost from the state and Gandhi's solution
[Guest]: was I am going to go back to the society and tell them that untouchability is bad we should
[Guest]: not do it so for people like Gandhi the reforms have to come from within the society and for
[Guest]: people like Ambedkar that you know villages are basically the sink of localism and those
[Guest]: kind of arguments so we need hard laws to basically protect individual rights and give
[Guest]: them social protection so those were the two axes we argue were the foundational axis on
[Guest]: which our founding fathers were fighting about and then we make a claim that the party system
[Guest]: development in India has happened along the fights on these axes which is basically the
[Guest]: like dominance of congress party system leading to multi-party system and then the rise of
[Guest]: right so basically what we say that 2014 in some ways is a culmination of ideological
[Guest]: battle that has been based on India's political map over hundred years right for a long time
[Guest]: ideologically remained marginalized and slowly basically through coalitions and through other
[Guest]: things gathered steam and it happens like parties move in some ideological space basically
[Guest]: Indira Gandhi moved congress party more in favor of statism and basically creating space
[Guest]: for right wing forces to coalesce and slowly they basically gather steam so in some ways
[Guest]: what we are also saying don't think of like last ten years and say how these two axes
[Guest]: basically explain everything in politics the claim is not that these axes explain electoral
[Guest]: outcomes the claim is that this is the structure on which Indian politics stand there may be
[Guest]: other things but these were the two things we focused on then we use lots of survey data
[Guest]: not all we conducted like basically survey data that were collected in 6771 by CSDS team
[Guest]: from 96 onward and we show that there is a consistent pattern in voting for a political
[Guest]: party and the ideological views those voters share so right like people who vote for BGP
[Guest]: or were voting for Jansang they were opposed to statism and they were also opposed to recognition
[Guest]: similarly people who were voting for socialist parties or left communist parties they were
[Guest]: in favor of recognition as also in favor of statism congress party was somewhere sitting
[Guest]: in the center of it now of course the survey questions were not consistent there were not
[Guest]: enough questions but the pattern that emerged from all survey data over 30 years was same
[Guest]: that this is how basically the ideological map of India looks like this is really fascinating
[Amit Varma]: and important to kind of think about especially the first point that you started with the
[Amit Varma]: importance of contingency on how politics evolves that you know England had an industrial
[Amit Varma]: revolution so that labor versus capital narrative can take place there and so on you know their
[Amit Varma]: narratives their politics was born from the fissures and the turmoil that they experienced
[Amit Varma]: and our circumstances were kind of different and it is therefore it almost seems inevitable
[Amit Varma]: that these two fault lines will emerge though until you explained it I never thought of
[Amit Varma]: it along these terms in the famous Ambedkar Gandhi debates which were around the question
[Amit Varma]: of caste I am always on Ambedkar's side I think Gandhi was kind of waffling on the issue
[Amit Varma]: at one point early on he even defended the Varna system and then he changed his mind
[Amit Varma]: but I felt that he was signaling part of the time I'm totally on Ambedkar's side in fact
[Amit Varma]: the interesting thing is that Ambedkar and Savarkar were exactly on the same side and
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi on the other side people don't realize this I mean in these polarized times perhaps
[Amit Varma]: to say anything good about Savarkar is dangerous but he was resolutely anti-caste and totally
[Amit Varma]: with Ambedkar on this and I think both Ambedkar and Gandhi might even have acknowledged this
[Amit Varma]: at different points in time but on the other issue on which Gandhi and Ambedkar argued
[Amit Varma]: with I think the diagnosis was correct that this is a deep problem we need to solve but
[Amit Varma]: in terms of prescription I feel that Gandhi was wise in saying that we need to change
[Amit Varma]: society first and I think Ambedkar would have agreed with him had he lived longer it's a
[Amit Varma]: tragedy that he didn't because my sense and I think we discussed this in the last episode
[Amit Varma]: where you know I have asked many people the question about was our constitution a relatively
[Amit Varma]: liberal constitution imposed on an illiberal society and if so is that not paradoxical
[Amit Varma]: because that imposition itself is illiberal and many people said that you gave the best
[Amit Varma]: answer to the question of the many guests I've asked I'll leave it to them to go back
[Amit Varma]: to that episode and discover it but one I think what has now happened is that because
[Amit Varma]: we assume that society could be changed from the top down through the state the politics
[Amit Varma]: of statism as it were that I don't think that top-down change could ever have worked and
[Amit Varma]: today finally you know politics has caught up with society and we are seeing the result
[Amit Varma]: of that and maybe Gandhi's approach was the right one that it wasn't enough just to pass
[Amit Varma]: laws and write a constitution and assume that the work was done the work was never done
[Amit Varma]: and Ambedkar himself said that the constitution is just topsoil yeah you know secondly on
[Amit Varma]: the particular the broader issue there of the society preceding the state that's an
[Amit Varma]: interesting argument but and I agree with it in a different sense in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: I think the people come first but I think individuals come first and the purpose of
[Amit Varma]: the state is to protect individual rights whereas the view here is more a notion of
[Amit Varma]: kind of group rights that this is how Hindus you know manage their inheritance this is
[Amit Varma]: how Hindus do their personal laws and the state should not interfere and that is a politics
[Amit Varma]: of statism and from the one hand you have other you know people saying that no society
[Amit Varma]: is messed up the state has to reform it and you know you mentioned the Hindu code bill
[Amit Varma]: this is this is really something I'm waiting to have an episode on at some point in time
[Amit Varma]: because at some point in time the BJP will you know go for the uniform civil code that's
[Amit Varma]: one of the last things left and I think on this particular issue I get where they're
[Amit Varma]: coming from because what the Congress party in power basically did was they said that's
[Amit Varma]: all these personal laws are messed up so we will put our own civil code and you know make
[Amit Varma]: you guys conform to that but we will only do it for the Hindus which fundamentally goes
[Amit Varma]: against the principle enshrined in the constitution that you have to treat everybody equally so
[Amit Varma]: the constant complaint there over the decades has been that the Muslims got to keep their
[Amit Varma]: personal laws but the Hindus had to change it and what is this if not a pandering and
[Amit Varma]: there are of course arguments on the other side as well but it's easy to see why this
[Amit Varma]: has so much resonance over the years so it's really interesting now what I would ask you
[Amit Varma]: to talk about because you know your current project is of course on the Congress party
[Amit Varma]: and why it is in decline and the decades long process and in a sense ideology and identity
[Amit Varma]: was also an explanation of this where you talk about there being these four party systems
[Amit Varma]: as you put it and in each of them the party at the center of the change in a sense is
[Amit Varma]: the Congress and in the first party system you look at it through the prism of these
[Amit Varma]: two cleavages the you know statism and recognition and you say when it came to statism there
[Amit Varma]: was a limited degree of statism they didn't go too far but when it came to recognition
[Amit Varma]: it was mainly for Dalits and no more than that and this was a first party system so
[Amit Varma]: what I'd sort of like you to do is give me a sense of how this changed over the decades
[Amit Varma]: and once again circumstances kind of made it change and it's almost like the sands of
[Amit Varma]: history are shifting under the Congress and the Congress is kind of floundering till they
[Amit Varma]: are where they are today which is basically buried six feet under quicksand so tell me
[Guest]: a little bit about this. So this project on Congress party with my colleague Asim at CPR
[Guest]: is to understand Congress in a long arc of history basically post-independence is India
[Guest]: and like we're not going back to independence and even if we are touching the post-independence
[Guest]: India is much more after the emergency but then the background of things are in 1960s
[Guest]: and early 70s so to link it with the ideology book basically we wanted to understand or
[Guest]: to explain that the party system change has happened along these axes what we see in four
[Guest]: party systems so the first party system from 1952 to 67 was a phase of Congress dominant
[Guest]: where Congress was dominant nationally as well as in state in 67 to 89 which is the
[Guest]: second party system we see Congress facing challenges in states but still winning most
[Guest]: of them remains dominant nationally. The third party system between 1989 to 2014 is actually
[Guest]: a multi-party system or a post Congress system where Congress is not even dominant nationally
[Guest]: and of course it's facing big challenges in the state and post 2014 what we are seeing
[Guest]: a rise of a second dominant party system where BJP has become the national dominant player
[Guest]: in state it faces challenges so the question was and so far we had this argument that perhaps
[Guest]: the Congress declined because of organization or because of leadership issues and so the
[Guest]: question which came to our mind was if organization or leadership was the most important explanation
[Guest]: why do we see variation in Congress decline across states there are certain states where
[Guest]: Congress is still an important player and even today so if you think of a Madhya Pradesh
[Guest]: or a Chhattisgarh or a Himachal Pradesh or a Uttarakhand or a Gujarat Congress is either
[Guest]: number one or number two then there are states where Congress remains an important player
[Guest]: not as dominant but still a player right and then there are states like Tamil Nadu, West
[Guest]: Bengal, UP or Bihar where Congress is a very very marginal player and so the explanation
[Guest]: we offer in that book is that Congress manages to distinguish itself ideologically in states
[Guest]: where its main competitor is BJP right so because these parties have a very different
[Guest]: stand on these two axes they can distinguish itself but in a state like UP how is Congress
[Guest]: going to distinguish itself on the question of reservation from BSP or on the question
[Guest]: of religious minorities or minority rights from Samajwadi party or on the question of
[Guest]: say statism from Samajwadi party or so wherever you get two centrist parties or parties which
[Guest]: have very similar ideological disposition as of Congress the Congress declines right
[Guest]: so that was our explanation on the Congress party and we don't think that's a fuller explanation
[Guest]: of so it explains the spatial variation but it does not explain fully the temporal thing
[Guest]: that has happened Congress has declined nationally there is no question about it right a party
[Guest]: which used to get vote share in 40s in the first party system came down to 35 in the
[Guest]: second party system came down to below 30 in the third party system and it's now 20%
[Guest]: below and there is one thing which we know about the Congress party which is in any state
[Guest]: where Congress has gone below 20% it has not recovered so one of like the claim I made
[Guest]: in a conversation with some people is that Congress actually does not know the route
[Guest]: to revival and that's why going forward all the current crisis I still don't think Congress
[Guest]: has figured out how it is going to ward off challenges and of course this is sort of like
[Guest]: disheartening for the Congress party sympathizers and Congress party voters but it should also
[Guest]: be disheartening for anyone who believes in the project of democracy in India because
[Guest]: you need multiple strong parties in the system to act as checks and balances dominance of
[Guest]: any party is not good or great for democracy because then the institutions are subverted
[Guest]: to suit certain interests it happened earlier and it's happening now so the decline of Congress
[Guest]: in that sense is going to be not productive for Indian democracy in medium run superbly
[Amit Varma]: put and just to kind of sum up what you wrote in your superb book about the four party systems
[Amit Varma]: you know in the first party system you know till 67 there's a limited degree of statism
[Amit Varma]: recognition largely for Dalits and you also separately in this draft that I have seen
[Amit Varma]: of your first couple of chapters of your forthcoming book which I can't wait for you to finish
[Amit Varma]: you've described you know three stages within the evolution of the Congress party and this
[Amit Varma]: stage kind of coincides with the stage when they were a mass party you know where they
[Amit Varma]: had pretty much the mass support in some senses I attribute some of that to inertia they just
[Amit Varma]: kind of inherited India almost from the British it was like handed to them when they left
[Amit Varma]: but at this point they're a mass party then within your book you write about the second
[Amit Varma]: party system which is late 60s and early 70s when there is much greater statism and the
[Amit Varma]: politics of recognition is still kind of the same and this is also when you know it starts
[Amit Varma]: moving from a mass party to being a dynastic party you know with Indira firmly entrenched
[Amit Varma]: as a one load star and her children coming into play and so on and so forth and then
[Amit Varma]: you talk about the third party system where in the politics of recognition the Congress
[Amit Varma]: has been undone because it's been dislodged by parties of the backward cast and especially
[Amit Varma]: in the states it starts losing a lot of ground very fast and then you have the fourth party
[Amit Varma]: system which kind of comes after that when you know that unipolar thing has completely
[Amit Varma]: ended and they're kind of gone and in your in your new books this the three stages you
[Amit Varma]: talk about a mass party dynastic and dynastic plus bureaucratized which is really interesting
[Guest]: to me so I wouldn't put all my money on this framing the reason being it's still a process
[Guest]: that is getting evolved it's one of our sort of early ventures into how to describe the
[Guest]: current state of Congress party and it's a struggle right so and struggle because if
[Guest]: you think academically about the political party literature if you want to seriously
[Guest]: write about Congress party you need to know dominant parties and in like Congress or India
[Guest]: was not only a case of having a dominant party you had LDP in Japan you had a dominant party
[Guest]: in Ireland in Malaysia in in Israel right so understanding why in some countries you
[Guest]: get a dominant party system right like for 20 30 odd years or African National Congress
[Guest]: in South Africa the second Congress was also a centrist party in that sense and centrist
[Guest]: parties have their own sets of advantages where they can quickly adapt to an eye in
[Guest]: the ideological spectrum but then they also have challenges because then they can't like
[Guest]: generate passions in the moments that are required and third as you mentioned Congress
[Guest]: party is also type of party which is dynastic not much has been written about dynastic parties
[Guest]: because we don't see this phenomena outside this South Asia so dynastic MPs or dynastic
[Guest]: legislators you will find across the world but political parties becoming beholden to
[Guest]: a family is a phenomena which is largely in South Asia and India is of course very much
[Guest]: part of it but if you look at Pakistan the PPP is of one party if you go to Sri Lanka
[Guest]: the Bhandar Naikes and Kumar Tunga was one family now the Rajapaksha control one party
[Guest]: if you go to Bangladesh both parties for last since the birth of Bangladesh like the two
[Guest]: top parties are controlled by two families right so in that sense in South Asia this
[Guest]: phenomena is very very big and in the Indian case most of our state level parties or regional
[Guest]: parties are family enterprises and so their functioning is in very different Pradeep wrote
[Guest]: one of the early papers in 2011 about dynastic parties and one of his arguments is that we
[Guest]: see rise of dynastic parties because it's to do with control of political campaign finances
[Guest]: and and other things so so one it's like three different type of parties then Congress basically
[Guest]: like nationally Congress has always been more than some of its parts it's a catch-all party
[Guest]: right it by catch-all party I mean that there is no pre-defined social base to this political
[Guest]: party basically Congress gets votes from all social communities and way back Tranoi Roy
[Guest]: and Ashok Lahiri or David Butler I think Tranoi Roy and David Butler had said that Congress
[Guest]: would share among communities is basically within the 10% deviation from its mean so
[Guest]: it like it gets votes from all communities like like BJP today is a dominant party gets
[Guest]: 70 to 75 percent vote among upper caste but gets almost just 10 or 15 percent among Muslims
[Guest]: or just 40 percent among Dalits so BJP vote in that sense is much more circumcised to
[Guest]: a community whereas Congress was a catch-all political party so you have to understand
[Guest]: these different types of dynamics to make a fuller sense of what has happened to the
[Guest]: party the second point is like you know in a long arc and of any organization forget
[Guest]: about political party but if even if you think of firms and companies there is a moment of
[Guest]: slump there is a moment of decline so Congress also saw a moment of slump and decline that
[Guest]: would have been a normal thing but what has happened that Congress is basically and most
[Guest]: people think of Congress decline as if something happened in 2014 and and that's the only moment
[Guest]: of decline but if you just plot Congress vote share from 1950 to 2019 basically it's a like
[Guest]: long decline of course there have been moments of ups and downs but if you draw a straight
[Guest]: line it's a decline so it becomes puzzling that a party of the freedom movement a party
[Guest]: which ruled India for most of the first four decades or after independence created most
[Guest]: of the institutions why it is finding hard to revive and revive not post 2014 but between
[Guest]: the period of 1990s and 2014 also they were in power in national government but have now
[Guest]: lost half of India like one can't imagine Congress coming back to power on its own in
[Guest]: West Bengal or Tamil Nadu or UP or Bihar in next 20-25 years it would be a miracle so
[Guest]: why has it happened and why is Congress finding it hard to revive is the intellectual question
[Guest]: we are grappling with so the early foray one argument basically drawing from you know this
[Guest]: idea of inertia that basically there is a bureaucratic structure that has taken over
[Guest]: this party and because of this we are not seeing any big shakeup within the party right
[Guest]: labor underwent a period of decline and it came up with a new vision of new labor LDP
[Guest]: went through a period of decline it repositioned itself Congress is finding hard to reposition
[Guest]: itself it's not being able to shake up its leadership it's not being able to offer a
[Guest]: alternative idea of India it's not able to revive itself organizationally or as an election
[Amit Varma]: machine so what is stopping it from doing it so many fascinating things that I want
[Amit Varma]: to double click on there so one you mentioned the bureaucratization listen please don't
[Amit Varma]: use that I'm not going to use six syllables six syllables you know I I get angry at students
[Amit Varma]: when they use it like even three or four syllables six syllables so you know maybe something
[Amit Varma]: like babufication actually that's also very long babudam I don't know I'll tell you if
[Amit Varma]: I think of something so I mean stuff like that yeah so there's a nice quote from a book
[Amit Varma]: you recommended re24 Akbar wrote by Rashid Kidwai which kind of expresses this bureaucratization
[Amit Varma]: which comes after the dynastic aspect of it where he writes quote though the Congress
[Amit Varma]: won two successive general elections under Sonia in 2004 and 2009 proving most political
[Amit Varma]: pundits wrong a best men and women in the in the UPA government were those who seem
[Amit Varma]: to have a patron-client relationship with either her or her acolytes in 2009 none of
[Amit Varma]: the AICC general secretaries occupying the big rooms at 24 Akbar Road except Rahul Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: had won a parliamentary election as a result they had little to contribute in terms of
[Amit Varma]: generating new ideas and issues into the ideas programmatic agenda some of them were more
[Amit Varma]: corporate style managers and politicians who were in touch with the people these non-accountable
[Amit Varma]: leaders often lacked the ideological clarity of which the Congress was so proud and they
[Amit Varma]: were unable to come up with any out-of-the-box idea stop code and speaking of the dynastic
[Amit Varma]: aspect of it I remember a friend of mine once said something which I think you also mentioned
[Amit Varma]: somewhere in your draft something to that effect of how when you look at a dynasty a
[Amit Varma]: political dynasty or other dynasties within fields you notice that from the starting point
[Amit Varma]: they just get smaller and smaller I mean not in terms of actual physical size but you know
[Amit Varma]: in terms of intellectual stature or whatever like an argument could be made that really
[Amit Varma]: Motilal onwards they got stupider one step at a time though Motilal was extremely high
[Amit Varma]: standard himself so Jawaharlal turned out fine but then now they've come all the way
[Amit Varma]: down to Rahul and by the time Priyanka Gandhi's pet dog takes over God knows what the scene
[Amit Varma]: is going to be so my question here before I delve deeper into all the different why's
[Amit Varma]: that you propose my question before we get there harks back to what you said earlier
[Amit Varma]: that we only see this kind of dynastic politics really succeed in South Asia and I'm curious
[Amit Varma]: as to whether you have any theories as to why that is because one would imagine that
[Amit Varma]: we are all as I have mentioned and I like to keep saying they're all hardwired for tribalism
[Amit Varma]: that there is that feudal sense in kind of all of us you know but outside India there
[Amit Varma]: are exceptions you know like little Trudeau takes over from daddy Trudeau and and even
[Amit Varma]: there he's a little stupider so but why South Asia why is this such a huge phenomenon here
[Guest]: so let me sort of add a couple of things one in my doctoral dissertation I actually studies
[Guest]: political families and dynasties which is to basically understand why some families
[Guest]: stay in power for a long period of time and others decline and this is a study based in
[Guest]: UP and I collected basically information on all political families so of course it's under
[Guest]: reported but what you were saying a little earlier which is you know there is a cliche
[Guest]: or a quote which is the first generation lays the foundation the second builds the empire
[Guest]: the destruction begins in the third and by the fourth one it's basically you know so
[Guest]: it happens like like there is a cycle two things on an average the building can happen
[Guest]: like in one or two generation and then it becomes too big for anyone to sort of manage
[Guest]: and control so most big empires also lasted for three or four generations only after 200
[Guest]: years there is a decline which is natural and I also mentioned in the first part of
[Guest]: our conversation that dynastic legislators are not exclusive to South Asia or India like
[Guest]: it happens in the US it happens in Japan it happens everywhere dynastic parties are somewhat
[Guest]: like exclusive phenomena in South Asia and perhaps if we are going to see you know functional
[Guest]: democracies in in sub-saharan Africa we might even see something developing even there but
[Guest]: you have administrators who have been there for 20-30 years so in a sense it's not to
[Guest]: do with political culture but much more to do with political institutions they are somewhat
[Guest]: easier to capture and once they get captured because like as I said political party formations
[Guest]: is easier and once the political party is formed it's formed around a leader and so
[Guest]: the leader basically leader and party becomes synonymous in that sense so perhaps that's
[Guest]: why we might be seeing more dynastic parties in our system it's a combination it must be
[Guest]: some I don't want to completely rule out the culture element but I think it's happening
[Guest]: much more because of the weak political institutions that we have fair enough let's get to sort
[Amit Varma]: of the narrative of the decline of the Congress and I'll quote from your am I allowed to quote
[Guest]: from your book since it isn't out yet you can quote but as I said this is first early
[Guest]: draft so it may not actually come in the book but I'm allowed to quote like for the purpose
[Amit Varma]: of conversations I'm basically whatever you decide yeah and by the way I should inform
[Amit Varma]: people that they're in the early stage of writing this book both Rahul and Asim who
[Amit Varma]: I've never met but I love journalism they haven't looked for a publisher for this so
[Amit Varma]: if any publisher is listening you know you would be crazy to wait this is something that
[Amit Varma]: kind of establishes the extent of their decline where you write quote the secular decline
[Amit Varma]: of the Congress started after the drubbing in the 89 elections followed by the relegation
[Amit Varma]: of the party to third or fourth position in four major states UP, Bihar, West Bengal and
[Amit Varma]: Tamil Nadu in UP the party slipped to second position in 1989 third in 91 fourth in 96
[Amit Varma]: and has remained there for the most part except a temporary recovery to third place in 2009
[Amit Varma]: in Bihar it slipped from second to in 1991 to fourth or worse from 96 in Tamil Nadu it
[Amit Varma]: slipped from first place due to then seat sharing alliances in 1991 to third in 96 and
[Amit Varma]: remained at or worse through to 2014 in West Bengal following the breakaway of the Trinamool
[Amit Varma]: in 97 Congress slipped to third in 1998 and finally to fourth in 2014 after the rout of
[Amit Varma]: 2014 Congress slipped to third or worse position in as many as 10 states and then in another
[Amit Varma]: excellent conversation you had in a seminar you pointed out that two out of five Congress
[Amit Varma]: candidates in the 2014 elections lost a deposit which 40% which would have been like unthinkable
[Amit Varma]: you know in in previous elections and you've also mentioned that some of the states where
[Amit Varma]: Congress had not been in power for 30 years at that time included West Bengal Uttar Pradesh
[Amit Varma]: Tamil Nadu Bihar Gujarat which is kind of completely crazy so it's clear that there's
[Amit Varma]: a decline and how I love the way you've addressed it is that typically an Indian researcher
[Amit Varma]: at this point in time would commit what can be called isomorphic mimicry to you know to
[Amit Varma]: simplify the jargon what they would do is they would take a framework which has been
[Amit Varma]: adopted in the West to study a similar phenomenon and try and apply it to the Congress party
[Amit Varma]: and what you've done is you have laid out what that framework is you've mentioned why
[Amit Varma]: it doesn't necessarily apply to the Congress and then you have come up with your the reasons
[Amit Varma]: that have been suggested by previous thinkers within India on the Congress decline so now
[Amit Varma]: before we go through that whole process take me through the you know the theories that
[Amit Varma]: exist about why dominant parties elsewhere have you know tended to decline and part of
[Amit Varma]: it of course is circumstances like you point out in the advanced world like in the West
[Amit Varma]: which are ethnically homogeneous you know the dominant parties focus on socio-economic
[Amit Varma]: issues and similarly in places like Malaysia and South Africa the ethnic cleavages are
[Amit Varma]: much harder and you know play a much more consequential part and the reasons for why
[Amit Varma]: dominant parties there sort of decline don't have to apply to India at all so tell me a
[Amit Varma]: little bit more about this what what are the reasons why dominant parties have kind of
[Amit Varma]: declined in the rest of the world when we look at it and what are the reasons why those
[Guest]: don't necessarily apply to the Congress here so the first reason for party decline and
[Guest]: not necessarily just for dominant party decline is that if we think of political parties as
[Guest]: an entity that are going to profess certain ideas they exist for a reason and if that
[Guest]: reason doesn't exist there is no need for that party to keep gaining traction right
[Guest]: so basically parties decline because the reasons for which they existed is no more that's not
[Guest]: the case there is a need for a party like Congress especially occupying the space of
[Guest]: on centers left center right then the second big reason is about ability of the party or
[Guest]: the leadership to be able to hold on to factional fluids right so parties are made up of factions
[Guest]: they are aggregation of different interest group either based on ideas or based on some
[Guest]: material advancement they want to make or identities at some point the leadership becomes
[Guest]: so weak that those factional fights go out of hand and they basically you know lead to
[Guest]: a decline so Congress throughout its history even pre-independence has seen these factions
[Guest]: basically moving out of the Congress party in fact I don't remember the name but some
[Guest]: famous person basically said if all the Congress factions can just come together we'll see
[Guest]: like a big mammoth party coming back to power but that's not how politics operate like why
[Guest]: would a Sharath Pawar or a Mamata Banerjee or a Jagan Reddy going to come back to Congress
[Guest]: when they can operate their like party in their states with full autonomy right like
[Guest]: why do they need to listen to Delhi that you have to act in this way or that way so like
[Guest]: idealistically or you can have these desires or thoughts but that's not going to happen
[Guest]: so what has happened in in last 20 years if you can think of like last big split within
[Guest]: the Congress party at a state level was Sharath Pawar and Mamata Banerjee otherwise after
[Guest]: that like post 2004 we have not seen any big splits in the Congress party like if anyone
[Guest]: has walked out like maximum would be a Jyotirathya Sindhia with 2023 legislators so no big splits
[Guest]: being happening in last 20 years and there is there are good reasons for it one of the
[Guest]: good reason I can think of it like despite like the famous G23 writing the letter and
[Guest]: occasional outburst that keeps happening and in my opinion it will keep happening because
[Guest]: now Congress has basically chosen the worst possible option for itself basically there
[Guest]: were some good options either basically throw everyone out and move ahead or listen to them
[Guest]: bring everyone in and work with them so those are good options but Congress has basically
[Guest]: chosen to do nothing which is the worst option for everyone but these the G23 or the leaders
[Guest]: within the G23 are not going to split the party in the middle because none of them I
[Guest]: can think of have basically resources or popularity to mobilize even within the state which they
[Guest]: come from so they can't create a state level party like except perhaps Haryana where Huda
[Guest]: might be able to do so I can't think of any other state where Congress leader on its own
[Guest]: can mobilize the entire state and also has the financial capital to do so running a political
[Amit Varma]: party well there was a sense that Amrinder could have done that but then they took care
[Guest]: of him but Amrinder is still basically saying that he might form a new political party and
[Guest]: if that is to happen he might have the capital but like in six months you and I will find
[Guest]: out his influence is going to be limited within three districts of Sangrur Patiala region
[Amit Varma]: yeah I mean I think this is a digression and we can tackle it right at the end but I think
[Amit Varma]: this was a negative sum game for both players it hurt Amrinder it hurt the Congress
[Guest]: yes like exactly and as you said we can talk about it later
[Amit Varma]: yeah we'll come to it at the end carry on sorry I interrupted
[Guest]: so so so these are like some of the important reasons again then you can think of changes
[Guest]: in the social composition of voters you can think in like basically socio-economic changes
[Guest]: that might happen which basically lead to changes in the base of which parties are mobilizing
[Guest]: and none of the reasons basically fully explain the decline of the Congress party and moreover
[Guest]: more than the decline the question which I and Asim are interested in is why is the party
[Guest]: not able to resurrect itself despite being say power in between 2004 and 14 at the national
[Guest]: level what did Congress party do to revive itself say in Bihar or UP or in Tamil Nadu
[Amit Varma]: or in West Bengal that that's extremely lucid and you've spoken
[Amit Varma]: about you know the four reasons why you know dominant parties decline around the world
[Amit Varma]: which are you know there are structural reasons lack of party cohesion and these two don't
[Amit Varma]: really apply to the Congress as you've said and weakening of resource advantages which
[Amit Varma]: applies a little bit and socio-political change which also you guys argued applies a little
[Amit Varma]: bit but they are both at best kind of part of the explanation you know when I think of
[Amit Varma]: the Congress I think in some ways of a lot of these big behemoth giant companies which
[Amit Varma]: were made irrelevant in the technological age for example Kodak comes to mind right
[Amit Varma]: Kodak made film and then they simply didn't get the digital revolution that was going
[Amit Varma]: to happen and boom that era kind of ended for them and similar giants which and I remember
[Amit Varma]: I think Tim Hufford wrote an excellent piece about it a long time ago was it Matt Ridley
[Amit Varma]: I don't remember but essentially about how the structure of a company is such that one
[Amit Varma]: all these departments that exist are silos which are specialized in doing one thing and
[Amit Varma]: they will not do anything else there is a status quo bias why take a chance do what
[Amit Varma]: you're supposed to the stakes are too high you will never disrupt yourself so somebody
[Amit Varma]: will always come and disrupt you but you will never disrupt yourself and ways of thinking
[Amit Varma]: are just ossified and therefore big companies are like these lumbering giants which are
[Amit Varma]: kind of moving slowly and they seem it's rare when they manage to adapt do you think there's
[Guest]: something to that as well I don't want to dismiss this reason definitely and I've heard
[Guest]: many people not many people but a couple of my friends whom I discussed this project with
[Guest]: they suggested that actually BJP is a 21st century party and Congress is not and their
[Guest]: argument was much more to do with the ease with with BJP adopted itself to all sorts
[Guest]: of like technological changes like you know basically running a massive IT cell and having
[Guest]: such a massive online presence whereas Congress took a long time to basically adopt itself
[Guest]: to these technological changes just like we were talking about this if you go to BJP we
[Guest]: website you will find most party documents related to BJP even historical ones scanned
[Guest]: and put online like like if you think of say Savarkar who's a Hindu that 23 page document
[Guest]: is scanned and on is on BJP website Congress party does not have most of his forget post
[Guest]: independence India like just like pre-independence India but of documents of 1980s and 1990s
[Guest]: are not online right so I'm not saying like if you put these documents online it will
[Guest]: give you more leverage or visibility but it's somehow the party is not adaptive to change
[Guest]: another example I will give you and and everyone would think it's a people may think it's a
[Guest]: very naive thing but BJP when it came to power everyone was allocated big office space I
[Guest]: think in 1980s or 1990s when Congress party was in power Congress allocated itself like
[Guest]: space to itself but Congress party did not renovate either its office on 24 Akbar Road
[Guest]: right or created a new office structure for itself BJP when it came to power created I
[Guest]: think a seven or eight story building at ITO in Delhi where the top two floors are reserved
[Guest]: for big press conferences or meetings or you know with high-tech gadgets where you can
[Guest]: communicate with your state level offices now think of this Congress party was in power
[Guest]: at the national level they could have utilized resources to create a similar structure for
[Guest]: themselves but they didn't and BJP when it came to power then they did it similarly and
[Guest]: I've heard the stories from people who have worked in the Congress party social media
[Guest]: department that the Facebook's and the Cambridge Analytica's of the world basically when they
[Guest]: were coming to India in 2010-11 all of them first approached the Congress party because
[Guest]: it was the party in the power but they didn't get positive response or you know like positive
[Guest]: energy from the Congress party they didn't even get similar vibe from the BJP but I think
[Guest]: Chief Minister of Gujarat then the current Prime Minister his office was basically proactive
[Guest]: and so they like latched on to all these opportunities that came their way and so apart from the
[Guest]: online like on the ground presence they have through these RSS carders and other things
[Guest]: they created a massive online infrastructure and now they have that advantage over other
[Amit Varma]: political parties.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah and this is a great point about the BJP being a 21st century party like leave aside
[Amit Varma]: for a moment value judgments and what do you think of the BJP's politics or the Congress's
[Amit Varma]: politics politics is about winning the BJP one thing that's obvious to everyone really
[Amit Varma]: over the last 15 years is the will to power that they will do anything it takes to win
[Amit Varma]: and that includes using modern techniques like dicing data at the booth level and kind
[Amit Varma]: of figuring out micro targeting strategies and you know how to carpet bomb the voters
[Amit Varma]: where they want to get the message across and how to hack minds as it were like who
[Amit Varma]: needs to hack EVM machines when you can hack minds and they've kind of figured all of that
[Amit Varma]: out and there is that will to power and there is that accountability when you don't win
[Amit Varma]: which is why after 2009 Advani is replaced by Modi you know and you simply don't have
[Amit Varma]: that in the Congress in the Congress rather you almost have the attitude from you know
[Amit Varma]: their feudal leaders that this attitude of entitlement the you know that they almost
[Amit Varma]: feel aggrieved that hey we should be in power how could you have taken this away from this
[Unknown]: what is this shit.
[Amit Varma]: I remember in the 2019 elections when Sonia contested in Rai Bareilly the person standing
[Amit Varma]: against her was a former party worker and Priyanka made this comment he used to touch
[Amit Varma]: our feet we will teach him a lesson and when you think about it as such an obnoxious comment
[Amit Varma]: to make and you completely get why they are being wiped out everywhere because of this
[Amit Varma]: attitude of entitlement and this resentment that we are being deprived of deprived of
[Amit Varma]: a rightful place and the point is that with both Rahul and Priyanka honestly it has to
[Amit Varma]: be said they haven't done a single day's work of honest labor in their lives you know while
[Amit Varma]: all of these they have just inherited those positions while all of these other leaders
[Amit Varma]: of other parties whatever you think of their politics they've come from the grassroots
[Amit Varma]: they've gone to jail in the emergency in many cases have come from the grassroots there's
[Amit Varma]: been the will to power they've worked hard for it so at one level it's not just like
[Amit Varma]: a big company which becomes his bureaucratic sloth it is also this terrible feudal attitude
[Amit Varma]: ki India toh hamara hai in fact I think when you know Indira Gandhi coined the slogan India
[Amit Varma]: Indira is India India is Indira that slogan should really have been Indira is Congress
[Guest]: Congress is Indira yeah so a couple of things one you know the slogan India is Indira Indira
[Guest]: is India was by then Congress president you and Devbar rather than Indira Gandhi and in
[Guest]: fact like when Congress Indira Gandhi split the Congress which first was Congress R and
[Guest]: then it became a Congress I so currently what you have is Indira Congress what is the All
[Guest]: India Congress Party is Indira Congress the second point is I don't want to put the entire
[Guest]: sort of blame of decline of Congress Party on the Gandhi family or Rahul or Priyanka
[Guest]: and but I agree with your sort of like sense that the people who are in charge of the Congress
[Guest]: Party or at the helm of the affairs are not putting enough of energy to show they want
[Guest]: to like they have will to power and and just to like quote I like Ram Guha like this year
[Guest]: or last year basically made a very interesting distinction that if you look at top three
[Guest]: people in Congress they all share the surname Rahul Gandhi Priyanka Gandhi Sonia Gandhi
[Guest]: Gandhi if you look at three people in BJP top three people Prime Minister Modi Amit
[Guest]: Shah JP Nadda these are three very different people from very three different backgrounds
[Guest]: and in that sense he was basically trying to make the contrast of what you suggested
[Guest]: and on this the feudal mindset Sharad Pawar very recently said that Congress is like that
[Guest]: old feudal lord or Zamindar and this was a snide remark which is you know they have lost
[Guest]: all the lands and they are just standing outside their Haveli and thinking you know all of
[Guest]: this land belong to us from Kanyakumari I think there is a deep structural problem that
[Guest]: Congress is going through and those problems are many fold one is perhaps in like the top
[Guest]: leadership within the Congress Party and not just the first family seems to have got disconnected
[Guest]: from what is happening across India to and just to give you an example I think Pradeep
[Guest]: and I did some small analysis and to indicate this also which is very interesting if you
[Guest]: look at the mainstream English newspaper today of course BJP ministers are writing columns
[Guest]: they are in the government but I have seen Congress ministers writing columns not just
[Guest]: when they are in government but when they are also in the opposition right I have not
[Guest]: either now this could be that BJP people were not giving space in these mainstream English
[Guest]: newspapers when they were in the opposition but write columns but also be on the field
[Guest]: mobilize so what happened in 2011 with the anti-corruption movement and in the aftermath
[Guest]: of that basically Congress Party in some ways lost a big part of its legitimacy among a
[Guest]: vast section of Indian population which is that the notion of privilege which is that
[Guest]: they are going to tolerate corruption and they are not going to be on the streets to
[Guest]: mobilize people look at the number of like civil society protests that has happened between
[Guest]: 2014 and now and Congress doesn't seem to be present or actively mobilizing at any of
[Guest]: those instances the crisis of second like of COVID and second wave the party just doesn't
[Guest]: know how to use these moments for its political revival it could be to do with the leadership
[Guest]: the top leadership they don't want to go out and so they are not letting others out I recently
[Guest]: was in one district Saharanpur district of UP where some research work we were doing
[Guest]: and I met a fourth generation Congress Party worker like in the beginning for the first
[Guest]: 10 minutes he was basically you know saying all the nice things and positive things and
[Guest]: didi and bhaiya and how they are important and then I kept on pushing him and at one
[Guest]: point I just you know I showed my frustration I said Abhinav let's forget the interview
[Guest]: I'll go and then slowly I pushed him again and then he slowly opened up and basically
[Guest]: nothing is happening within this party we don't have access we don't have an idea what
[Guest]: is to be done we there is no communication from bottom to top and so it's right now it's
[Guest]: a party which does not have a purpose and I think that's the crisis of the party I'll
[Amit Varma]: disagree with you on one point I mean which is that they are missing all of the sort of
[Amit Varma]: moments of social ferment in the last few years like you mentioned the second wave but
[Amit Varma]: one of the things I kind of remember was that individual members of the Congress and even
[Amit Varma]: the Aam Aadmi Party you know both parties are otherwise criticized a lot for not being
[Amit Varma]: a strong enough opposition actually provided sterling service like on Twitter for example
[Amit Varma]: Srinivas of the Congress was extremely visible for all that he did to help people out and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth but I agree that you could say that these are kind of ad hoc things happening
[Amit Varma]: and there is not a broader cohesive narrative strategy actually you know being formulated
[Amit Varma]: even in this Lakhimpur Keri thing you know Priyanka Gandhi did actually try to go there
[Amit Varma]: and she was unfairly arrested so on many issues I think they do make the right noises which
[Amit Varma]: nobody else does including you know junior bigot Arvind Kejriwal but the wars they are
[Amit Varma]: winning are on Twitter they're not on the ground at all as you know so many people have
[Amit Varma]: pointed out so you know we spoke about the global reasons why dominant parties decline
[Amit Varma]: elsewhere don't necessarily apply to the Congress and just as you brought your own prism to
[Amit Varma]: bear when it came to the question of ideology you know what what are the ideological fissures
[Amit Varma]: in India you've kind of not exactly brought your own prisms but you know collated insights
[Amit Varma]: from local scholars on the decline of the Congress and you've given a whole bunch of
[Guest]: those as well so you know share some of those reasons okay first I want to say that you
[Guest]: know we don't have a good scholarly treatment of Congress party post 1977 like there is
[Guest]: no big academic book which is basically looking at the inner workings of the party and making
[Guest]: a claim of course there are some important contributions like you mentioned Rasheed
[Guest]: Kidwai's 24 Akbar Road and there have been some papers but there is still this sort of
[Guest]: gap in understanding what has happened within the Congress parties post-emergency there
[Guest]: have been different sort of angles to understand the Congress decline not to explain the Congress
[Guest]: decline but to explain something else for example Christopher Jeff Law and Kanchan
[Guest]: Chandra both have worked on say the rise of BSP and in some ways they want to understand
[Guest]: the rise of BSP and differentiate it from why Dalits left the Congress party and basically
[Guest]: joined the BSP right so it was not a research on Congress party but a research on BSP and
[Guest]: the argument there was that within the Congress party there was a representational blockage
[Guest]: Congress party remained a party of upper caste elites and privileged and so leadership positions
[Guest]: were basically in some ways reserved for these categories and there will be a moment in time
[Guest]: when these rising elites from lower caste would think that oh we should also be getting
[Guest]: leadership position not like party president but becoming general secretaries and state
[Guest]: party presidents and state secretaries so the first thesis is that basically Congress
[Guest]: did not give enough representation to these groups and slowly these groups moved out and
[Guest]: formed their own caste based parties which is sort of linked to Congress decline that's
[Guest]: one similarly related to this argument of representational blockage of caste is basically
[Guest]: Congress is a party which was run from New Delhi by Hindi heartland elites and they were
[Guest]: you know very like I am not getting the word but basically not taking cognizance of the
[Guest]: regional aspirationals and regional elites like the famous example of how Rajiv Gandhi
[Guest]: blasted TJ and Jaya on Hyderabad airport and which basically was used by NTR in 1982 campaign
[Guest]: in Andhra Assembly so regional identity assertions in many part of the country especially in
[Guest]: northeast and in south so this these led to regional parties which were basically utilizing
[Guest]: regional sentiments and led to the Congress party decline third argument has been about
[Guest]: the organizational and institutional decay of the Congress party so what happens and
[Guest]: that's why like when we're talking about Indira Gandhi or Savarkar or Ambedkar or Gandhi we
[Guest]: have to always understand that these are the creatures of time right there they are taking
[Guest]: decisions in certain moment of time and some decisions turned out to be good or some bad
[Guest]: right so Indira Gandhi when she's elevated to the post of prime ministership by the syndicate
[Guest]: thinking that you know we can control this lady and Gungi Gudiya and but she she outsmarted
[Guest]: them and so in in her effort to deal with the challenge which was coming from the syndicates
[Guest]: which was right-leaning she basically aligned the Congress party to the leftist or left
[Guest]: party so actually there was a the the 67th government had outside support from the communist
[Guest]: party of India right so she moved her party towards these ideas or towards the principles
[Guest]: of statism so and and in that process between 67 and 75 basically she takes lot of decisions
[Guest]: which became detrimental to the way Congress inner workings used to happen so couple of
[Guest]: things happen basically organizational elections got suspended which was a hallmark of like
[Guest]: why Congress party remain one of the dominant everyone wants to be the part of the Congress
[Guest]: party and those organizational elections were one instruments of mobility for people to
[Guest]: rise up the rank so organizational elections got suspended then in in her effort to win
[Guest]: national election of 1971 she de-linked the national elections from the state elections
[Guest]: earlier both elections used to happen simultaneously which basically opened up state elections
[Guest]: for these state level parties to say okay you elect Congress in Delhi but we can run
[Guest]: the state better which is what is happening now and perhaps this is one of the reasons
[Guest]: why you know the BJP or Modi's thinking of bringing one nation one election back where
[Guest]: you basically you know align national sentiments to even play up during state elections so
[Guest]: so that was basically the decisions to suspend organization the decision to basically de-link
[Guest]: the national and state elections and the decision to basically some way change chief ministers
[Guest]: if you look at what happened in Pradeep and I wrote a op-ed 5-6 years ago on this basically
[Guest]: between 1967 and 1989 Congress chief ministers in states were changed at whims and fancies
[Guest]: right like a state like UP between 1980 and 1989 saw 6 chief ministers right and so we
[Guest]: basically it was a rough like very preliminary analysis to show that in states where more
[Guest]: times chief ministers change the number of parties in those states are higher today basically
[Guest]: saying either the person will join another party or will open his or her own party right
[Guest]: and that's why you are seeing because if he or she was the chief minister he will have
[Guest]: enough capital to at least start a political party and that's why you're seeing so many
[Guest]: parties right so that became another reason because you were changing chief minister and
[Guest]: I also think that this process of basically not letting any chief minister stay for a
[Guest]: long time because that person can challenge to the national level is the reason that Congress
[Guest]: now does not have big state level politicians who would say that if you don't listen I will
[Guest]: walk out today right that's why you're not seeing a vertical split in Congress party
[Guest]: and then enable so once they all started becoming weak at the national level they align with
[Guest]: like you know for national elections they went into coalitions with parties which state
[Guest]: leaders didn't want right so Mamata Banerjee she was fighting all her life against the
[Guest]: left and then you decide that left would be part like you know you were supporting the
[Guest]: left government like left supported government in center and those were became the issues
[Guest]: so people like Mamata Banerjee moved out so factionalism or factions moved out basically
[Guest]: leaving your cadres or your party most of your party moved out with your state leader
[Guest]: so party became weak nationally because slowly the units are going away and then of course
[Guest]: with the change like what happened like the sudden change between 1989 and 1991 of like
[Guest]: the three M's the Mandal, the Mandir, the market all three M's Congress wasn't prepared
[Guest]: basically think of like what happened in UP why Congress from suddenly being the like
[Guest]: top player in 1989 become second in 91 and third in 96 or fourth in 96 so Mandir, Mandal,
[Guest]: market struck at the same point I think we have some intuition about how Mandal and Mandir
[Guest]: played out and there is a scholarly work but we don't actually know how market has shaped
[Guest]: Indian voters in last 30 years not a single work so basically Mandir and Mandal happens
[Guest]: upper caste is going towards the BJP Dalits are going towards the BSP the Muslims are
[Guest]: gravitating towards the Janata Dal and Samajwadi party later on Congress had no clear stand
[Guest]: in at that moment of time are they with like in favor of reservation against reservation
[Guest]: are they in favor of Mandir or they in favor of Marj so no stand and this is a centrist
[Guest]: dilemma right and that's why you have to understand why Congress party sometimes fails to take
[Guest]: clear stand because it is a catch-all party it does not want to basically you know upset
[Guest]: any group they take some stand on Shahbano and also they open the locks of Babri Masjid
[Guest]: because they want to play both sides and sometimes playing both sides will basically you end
[Guest]: up with nothing so that's also sort of like ideological confusion or not having an ideological
[Guest]: clarity these are some of the reasons which people have talked about why it led to the
[Amit Varma]: Congress party's decline yeah I love the way you you know point out that it all start starts
[Amit Varma]: with circumstance that Indira wants to fight back against a syndicate she has to rebrand
[Amit Varma]: herself and how does she rebrand herself the logical thing is to go left and she takes
[Amit Varma]: us into a disastrous period of time not out of conviction which one could still understand
[Amit Varma]: an excuse but simply out of political expediency in a completely sociopathic manner like people
[Amit Varma]: talk about the emergency I think what Indira did with her economic policies like the bank
[Amit Varma]: nationalizations and Ferrafima label or so on and so forth there's a litany of them actually
[Amit Varma]: kept millions of Indians in poverty for at least a couple of decades longer than necessary
[Amit Varma]: absolute monster and you spoke about you know Congress not having a clear sense of his own
[Amit Varma]: identity I think it doesn't have a clear sense of his own history either because every year
[Amit Varma]: on Sanjay Gandhi's birthdate all the official handles of Congress will tweet out photographs
[Amit Varma]: with what a great leader he was and I am like who are you kidding you criticize the BJP
[Amit Varma]: correctly you correctly criticize the BJP for their whatsapp history and you are trying
[Amit Varma]: to paint Sanjay Gandhi as a great leader he was a sociopathic monster he was worse than
[Amit Varma]: Modi you know Modi could actually have him as a role model I mean catch-all is fine but
[Amit Varma]: you kind of need to look in words and I think this perhaps stems not from a deliberate strategy
[Amit Varma]: that let us you know resurrect him as a figure to be revered but they really don't know they're
[Amit Varma]: just stupid you know that is sometimes the sort of sense that I get and again the culture
[Amit Varma]: of psychofancy plays a big part like I remember many years back and I mentioned this in a
[Amit Varma]: previous show but I simply can't remember who this person was but there was a picture
[Amit Varma]: of a mafia don who was basically quite short 5'7 or 5'6 or something and then there were
[Amit Varma]: pictures of all the people who succeeded him the whole lineage of the gang till eventually
[Amit Varma]: it disappeared and they were all shorter than the last guy so it's like you're surrounding
[Amit Varma]: yourself with people shorter than you till you get and which strikes me as a great metaphor
[Amit Varma]: for what can happen to a party like for example even it's not just Mamata and Sharad Pawar
[Amit Varma]: and all that even in recent times like Himanta Biswa Sharma couldn't get an audience with
[Amit Varma]: Rajiv Gandhi who in all his arrogance didn't meet the local leader and what happened next
[Amit Varma]: he joined the BJP and Congress lost all seven northeast states similarly there's an interview
[Amit Varma]: of Mahua Maitra where she's speaking to Barkha Dutt and she was in the youth Congress but
[Amit Varma]: you know she realized that there is no mobility I cannot rise in the party and of course I
[Amit Varma]: don't have inner party democracy so for all this talk of that Rahul Gandhi does about
[Amit Varma]: saving democracy he does not believe in it you can see that from his actions have elections
[Amit Varma]: in your own party first and Mahua Maitra left and you know people often ask that hey if
[Amit Varma]: not the Gandhi's who if you leave the space leaders will come you know if you leave the
[Amit Varma]: space leaders will come in politics politics abhors a vacuum as the cliche goes you know
[Amit Varma]: who could have predicted in 2004 when Kerry lost to Bush that your next president was
[Amit Varma]: going to be a guy whose middle name was Hussain and whose surname rhymed with Osama and yet
[Amit Varma]: that's what happened Barack Obama came to power who could have foreseen four years later
[Amit Varma]: that madcap fool everybody laughed at Donald Trump would one day be president strange things
[Amit Varma]: happen in politics very suddenly but you have to kind of create the space for it and you
[Amit Varma]: know another example of that kind of psychophancy you spoke about how they were changing state
[Amit Varma]: chief ministers all the time as if they are their personal servants and I remember at
[Amit Varma]: one point Gyani Zahil Singh before he was made president Gyani Zahil Singh said that
[Amit Varma]: something to the effect of if Indira ji I wants me to clean her toilets I will clean
[Amit Varma]: her toilets stop quote pretty much his exact words and lo and behold he was made president
[Amit Varma]: of our August Republic so you know something had to give and and something I think eventually
[Amit Varma]: kind of gave so tell me this about the Congress right the picture that I'm getting kind of
[Amit Varma]: is that society is changing the country is changing everything is being transformed and
[Amit Varma]: Congress is this big lumbering party that is not able to adapt to the change and in
[Amit Varma]: some ways it is changing itself and actually going backwards but it is simply not being
[Amit Varma]: able to adapt so can you paint a picture for me over a period of time you know people talk
[Amit Varma]: about how the Congress has declined in the last five years for example or since 2014
[Amit Varma]: paint a picture for me showing just how much bigger the disconnect has become between today
[Amit Varma]: and 30 years ago with the disconnect between Indian politics society and the Congress Party
[Guest]: like I think what you asked is very important which is the country is changing the society
[Guest]: is changing parties also move in tandem with with with the society in some sometimes what
[Guest]: they do basically changes societies and they also have to adapt to the changing circumstances
[Guest]: so and Congress Party in the past have been undertaking those exercises right in 19 early
[Guest]: 1960s when Congress Party didn't do really well in 57 election and it seemed that after
[Guest]: a couple of like sessions in Avadi and Nagpur and like when you know there was a bifurcation
[Guest]: not bifurcation but within a split when the Swatanta Party faction from the Congress Party
[Guest]: moved out Congress carried out an exercise what is known as Kamraj plan where some ministers
[Guest]: from the government were moved to the organization and some people were moved from the organization
[Guest]: to the government so parties have to keep doing these kind of reshuffling and readjusting
[Guest]: right if the BJS used to harp on the Hindi Hindu Hindustan type but they like once this
[Guest]: thought of expanding themselves outside in the heartland going to the east and to the
[Guest]: south now Hindi remains but largely in rhetorics but not majorly right so you parties have
[Guest]: to keep adapting to the changing circumstances and it's not because they like a bigger ship
[Guest]: needs a greater space to maneuver itself so it has to prepare itself in advance what is
[Guest]: happening of late in the Congress Party since 1990s I think the changes are taking at a
[Guest]: much rapid pace Congress starts certain procedures or processes to make those adaptation but
[Guest]: is not taking to its logical conclusion and let me answer this question by basically referring
[Guest]: to how Congress has or has not changed so Congress Party and there is a debate and it
[Guest]: has not been resolved this is a like a debate which is was Congress Party ever had a deep
[Guest]: rooted organization in 60s or 70s in fact Pradeep in his first book basically showed
[Guest]: that the member of Congress Party used to increase during Congress internal election
[Guest]: membership of the party basically because if you have like if you can mobilize higher
[Guest]: number of members you are going to get bigger position with the Congress Party in the party
[Guest]: so party members it was based on those patronage systems of these privileged elites the second
[Guest]: point which Pradeep also pointed out in his work and many others also have written about
[Guest]: is Congress was basically a party which was different in different states like that its
[Guest]: social base used to be very different in different states and so nationally it looked up catch
[Guest]: all party but in state it was rooted in specific social cleavages and specific caste what
[Guest]: happens post-emergency when Congress wins 1980 and 1984 people have actually written
[Guest]: about this that it was not a restoration of previous Congress coalition there were certain
[Guest]: changes started happening especially Dalits in the North India had started moving out
[Guest]: of the Congress Party Muslims were not happy in fact one way to think about the big change
[Guest]: that has happened like at least in the social structure for the Congress Party that Congress
[Guest]: Party's social base has narrowed in most of the states where now they get votes from specific
[Guest]: segments it's not a catch all coalition anymore in some ways and none of us have seen this
[Guest]: document so I won't be able to say I only have read it in newspaper reports that AK
[Guest]: Antony committee report after 2014 election losses wrote that in public perception Congress
[Guest]: is seen as a Muslim party now that a large portion of its voters come from religious
[Guest]: minorities Muslims than other section the other thing so in 1989 when Rajiv Gandhi was
[Guest]: at the helm of affairs the Indian electorate size was around 400 crores Congress Party
[Guest]: received 140 crore votes now Indian electorates are around 800 and Congress in 2019 still
[Guest]: received 140 crores right so the electorate size has doubled but the Congress vote share
[Guest]: has remained I think it's the same votes they keep counting every election I'm kidding so
[Guest]: what is happening and so they are also losing votes among poorer sections and also among
[Guest]: younger sections because in some ways like these sections don't see Congress as a party
[Guest]: of aspiration and hope a party which is going to offer them mobility and Modi for right
[Guest]: or wrong reasons the way he beats his sort of like various welfare schemes and other
[Guest]: things is much more tied in the language of aspiration hope rather than in a language
[Guest]: of entitlement and other things so that's another sort of like important difference
[Guest]: between the two parties and we have already discussed about how Congress Party has not
[Guest]: been able to adapt itself to the technology driven campaigns of 21st century they for
[Guest]: a very long time Congress did not realize and perhaps because it was a big ship or a
[Guest]: dominant party that the soil or the earth below it is basically sinking or moving fast
[Guest]: and it needs to adapt to change so till 1998 the Congress Party still lived in the world
[Guest]: of basically it's like we are the National Party we rule from Kashmir to Kanyakumari
[Guest]: like they had no idea whether they wanted to enter into coalitions or not they enter
[Guest]: into ad hoc coalitions which in fact diminished their power to a great extent whereas BJP
[Guest]: basically used those coalitions or allies to gain a foothold in different states and
[Guest]: a good example is Karnataka. Karnataka like in 1994 BJP was a marginal player and slowly
[Guest]: basically they align with Ram Krishna Hegde's party swollen them up became the second player
[Guest]: then they align with JDS and now they are basically the most important party in the
[Guest]: state so it took a long time for Congress to understand the changing circumstances and
[Guest]: adapt to it similarly Congress basically keeps postponing forget the presidential election
[Guest]: but having some sort of like chintan shivits after losses sitting and discussing that like
[Guest]: even say an AK Antony committee report why not some version of it should be distributed
[Guest]: to the state leaders or some other people to understand why did the party loss what
[Guest]: corrective measures should be taken so no conclusive steps in that direction they started
[Guest]: primary election one day and then they suspended it then they created Aman Ke Sipahi suspended
[Guest]: it so they keep bringing in things to make reforms or changes but they don't take it
[Guest]: to a logical conclusion and basically try to like all parties do that but if you are
[Guest]: facing this kind of struggle and decline you need to carry out some surgical operation
[Amit Varma]: chart out your course to revival surgical operation indeed but one great point you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: which you've also sort of mentioned in your seminar piece which I'll link from the show
[Amit Varma]: notes is when you talk about language and you write quote look at the difference between
[Amit Varma]: Rahul Gandhi and Narendra Modi's speeches Rahul Gandhi's argument about welfare policies
[Amit Varma]: often sounded patronizing whereas Modi talked about the same policies in the language of
[Amit Varma]: empowerment they were articulating very different things stop good now I have a question for
[Amit Varma]: you based taking off from something you said earlier where you said that you are questioning
[Amit Varma]: whether Congress ever had a deep-rooted organization per se I'll throw the question at you that
[Amit Varma]: did Congress ever have a deep-rooted ideological belief or a deep-rooted belief any sense of
[Amit Varma]: values that the party stands for like one theme that I discussed in my episode last
[Amit Varma]: week with Shivam Shankar Singh and that in fact I think I asked Prashant Jha also when
[Amit Varma]: I did my episode about the BJP with him is that in BJP you do see this will to power
[Amit Varma]: they will do what it takes to come to power they will you know buy members of the opposition
[Amit Varma]: party they will you know do dicing and slicing of different constituencies at you know to
[Amit Varma]: a really fine degree but while there is a will to power there is there are also a bunch
[Amit Varma]: of core things that they stand for which they don't compromise on and at one level I thought
[Amit Varma]: that something's got to give because these two at some point will contradict each other
[Amit Varma]: if they will do anything to win they can't always stay true to their core beliefs for
[Amit Varma]: example in the northeast somewhere they told the people that hey you know you guys can
[Amit Varma]: eat beef it's okay you know we won't stop you this is just for the other guys but does
[Amit Varma]: the Congress have any core beliefs at all and the larger question here is can any party
[Amit Varma]: have core beliefs which are not based on political imperatives can any party because even other
[Amit Varma]: parties which are fixed to certain positions took those positions in the first place for
[Amit Varma]: reasons which don't change for example you know the BSP will always speak up for a certain
[Amit Varma]: group of people the SP will always speak up for a certain group of people those are their
[Amit Varma]: vote banks they can't do anything about that those are the positions the shift changed
[Amit Varma]: from attacking South Indians to attacking Muslims as the sands kind of change is changed
[Amit Varma]: and they rebranded themselves now what does the Congress really believe in because I look
[Amit Varma]: at the Congress even after independence it is kind of happenstance that Nehru happened
[Amit Varma]: to be the guy you know it could easily have been Patel Nehru even almost stepped down
[Amit Varma]: once in 1950 I think when there was something happening in Bangladesh and Srinath Raghavan
[Amit Varma]: told me this I thought seriously about stepping down and in any number of scenarios when Nehru
[Amit Varma]: isn't there they could be Patel where you have more economic freedom perhaps and you
[Amit Varma]: have you know different scenarios playing out or you have Rajaji or any number of people
[Amit Varma]: who all believed in a lot of things differently from Nehru so it's not as if the party believed
[Amit Varma]: in all the things that Nehru did it was a circumstance that he happened to be the guy
[Amit Varma]: but in a parallel universe somewhere it was Patel in some other parallel universe there
[Amit Varma]: wasn't even partition and so on and so forth there are a million sort of scenarios so what
[Amit Varma]: is your take on this and is the Congress's problem then that they simply can't figure
[Amit Varma]: out what they should believe in that Rahul of course wants to posture on Twitter and
[Amit Varma]: he's taken these sort of really archaic positions where sometimes it feels like he wants to
[Amit Varma]: disown the 1991 reforms which is the best thing his party ever did you know in fact
[Amit Varma]: our economic decline really started in 2011 not in 2014 and this is something you know
[Amit Varma]: Pooja Mehra writes about in her book and she did an episode with me and the single reason
[Amit Varma]: for that is that Sonia Gandhi ignored the wishes of her Prime Minister Manmohan Singh
[Amit Varma]: and foisted Pranab Mukherjee as a Finance Minister at which point you have you know
[Amit Varma]: retrospective taxation and you know a whole bunch of things which I've spoken about in
[Amit Varma]: detail with Pooja and others in previous episodes so yeah to cut a long story short deep-rooted
[Amit Varma]: organization to take care but what does it stand for today I know what Rahul Gandhi stands
[Amit Varma]: for on Twitter but you're not winning elections there and you also see them chasing the Hindu
[Amit Varma]: vote in various different manners which seems to me to be completely stupid you are not
[Amit Varma]: going to out Hindutva the BJP something that even you know Aam Aadmi Party will discover
[Amit Varma]: at some point even the BJP may not be able to control this tiger that it is riding on
[Guest]: so couple of things on this I think we should not just look like at the current moment there
[Guest]: is a confusion within the party because different people within the party seems to have a very
[Guest]: different view of what the Congress Party is and the leader and party sometimes you
[Guest]: know have a like a big overlap of what that ideological standpoint is and it's natural
[Guest]: right leadership generally comes from within the party and whatever the median position
[Guest]: within the party is leader is reflective of that and leaders also change the course of
[Guest]: parties like the rebranding happens because leaders take certain position so I think the
[Guest]: Congress Party of 1950s and 60s you are absolutely right had someone else been the leader
[Guest]: of the Congress Party the course and direction of Congress Party would have been different
[Guest]: parties are always coalition of interest and whichever coalition is in power or basically
[Guest]: like steering the ship the ideological proclivities of that interest group would be reflected
[Guest]: the most so if Patel had taken the Congress would have been in a different direction and
[Guest]: Subhash Chandra Bose would have taken it would have been a different direction right so yes
[Guest]: Nehru being a towering figure in a way it was his like he put his weight behind lot
[Guest]: of things if Nehru would not have made Hindu code bill a do and die battle I don't think
[Guest]: it would have got ever passed in the parliament he not only basically got it broken down into
[Guest]: four different legislations and then passed one by one so yes and and by the way for those
[Amit Varma]: who don't know Nehru is a reason the sedition law is there the sedition law was declared
[Amit Varma]: unconstitutional by the Supreme Court of India in 1950 but Nehru wanted to use it against
[Amit Varma]: his political enemies which at that time was a communist so your so-called great liberals
[Amit Varma]: Nehru brought the sedition law back on the books with the First Amendment and so continuing
[Guest]: the conversation in a way like what was like Congress's position in 1950s or 60s once the
[Guest]: socialist wing basically moved out of the Congress Party pre-independence in the 1930s
[Guest]: and 1940s and then slowly the right-wing factions with Patel and Tandon and Raja Gopalachari
[Guest]: right moving out basically the centrist faction within the Congress Party remained so the
[Guest]: idea was of much more Madhyam Marg right which is not going in any extreme being accommodative
[Guest]: of different sentiments right be it religious be it like religion would be allowed but it's
[Guest]: not like the state would going to lean on any side I think that was the position of
[Guest]: the Congress Party the vision of India in that why we call it a Nehruvian India was
[Guest]: basically on the principles of say democracy diversity and development like we are going
[Guest]: to accommodate diversity and we will find means to accommodate that diversity on the
[Guest]: development front the vision was that the state is going to take the burden right is
[Guest]: going to be the principal provider principal consumer principal producer and on democracy
[Guest]: front that we are going to basically develop ourself as a liberal electoral democracy and
[Guest]: on foreign policy also we'll make equity so I think like the Nehruvian standpoint was
[Guest]: a thought-out standpoint given those circumstances Indira Gandhi basically moves from the Nehruvian
[Guest]: consensus and most of these like ideological worldviews are developed through some sort
[Guest]: of like compromises and consensus right even within the BJP if you are going to look there
[Guest]: are going to be some orthodox who would say that no one should be allowed in the temple
[Guest]: right other than the upper caste and then there are some reformist also within the camp
[Guest]: so ideological position of a political party is not I won't say compromised but a consensus
[Guest]: or median position of different factions and it keeps changing upon which faction is in
[Guest]: power slowly what happens that with the changing time Congress is not able to update what its
[Guest]: grand vision for India should be it made an effort in 2004 where it basically you know
[Guest]: Congress ka haath aam aadmi ke saath that was a big sort of like economic module where
[Guest]: there is a change it also basically tried something on the reservation aspects by going
[Guest]: for Mandel to also for Sachar committee report and thinking about what to do about religious
[Guest]: minorities I think basically they were in the first UPA term trying to create a new
[Guest]: Congress but somehow they were not able to take to its logical conclusion and I think
[Guest]: like two things which we will try to focus in this book one is that crucial period around
[Guest]: 2009 where there's like seen that Congress can recover right and then they suddenly the
[Guest]: anti-corruption thing happens and then they basically a crisis of legitimate that's that's
[Guest]: one moment to look for and the second moment is to actually look for the period between
[Guest]: 1991 and 1998 when Gandhi's are not at the helm of affairs why could party not think
[Guest]: of basically move out of the Gandhi's shadow right what like of course there are always
[Guest]: going to be factions and leaders who are going to say you know because it serves their vested
[Guest]: interest that they will like they got Indira Gandhi the goongi gudiya let's bring Sonia
[Guest]: Gandhi but like how can like I just don't understand how can these like big Congress
[Guest]: leaders seasoned Congress players think that once the power goes back to the family they
[Guest]: will be able to do what they want to do like how can they be so short-sighted so what what
[Amit Varma]: are your candidate answers for this I don't have a good answer at the moment okay let's
[Amit Varma]: come to current times like you know people keep asking that hey if Rahul Gandhi is a
[Amit Varma]: deadweight on the party and in fact Ramchandra Guha in an episode with me called him a born
[Amit Varma]: loser because I mean the argument is 2014 look at the number of seats 2019 look at the
[Amit Varma]: number of seats he might be a nice guy you know but I wrote a piece on this once but
[Amit Varma]: the point is you know whether he has character or intelligence or the right ideas or would
[Amit Varma]: make a better prime minister than Modi are all irrelevant if he cannot win an election
[Amit Varma]: you know so I completely get where Guha is coming from and my sort of repose to the question
[Amit Varma]: of why no one rebels against him really comes from game theory because you know in game
[Amit Varma]: theory there's you know something that refers to that old adage of belling the cat you know
[Amit Varma]: that a bunch of mice realize that they're constantly getting knocked off by a cat what
[Amit Varma]: do they do the idea is that you put a bell around the cat's neck so you can hear it when it comes
[Amit Varma]: but the first mouse who goes with a bell to the cat will probably die right so for a similar reason
[Amit Varma]: it is optimal for any potential rebel within the congress not to make the first move himself
[Amit Varma]: because it's not the first mover who will win you know there will be carnage if there is carnage
[Amit Varma]: and somebody else will eventually take over if there is a change at all so it's game theoretic
[Amit Varma]: nobody can act first and this G23 is really interesting because it's like they knew they
[Amit Varma]: had to freaking act they acted in such a large group that you can't single any one person out
[Amit Varma]: really though I think poor Sanjay Shah was out of the picture by then but it didn't really work
[Amit Varma]: now I'm intrigued by something you said earlier where you said that in this current moment
[Amit Varma]: you know what congress has done is made absolutely the wrong choice when it comes to their leadership
[Guest]: so elaborate on this please so so think of this right the moment when the G23 wrote a letter
[Guest]: there were four possible options there could be others also but I'll like four choices the
[Guest]: questions they raised or the demands they made seemed very straightforward genuine demand right
[Guest]: like they were not asking to replace Rahul Gandhi they said like we need a full-time president
[Guest]: and you come take over the party and run right that's the least the congress party or the
[Guest]: president could have done basically Rahul Gandhi coming back and assuming the party
[Guest]: G23 made a demand it has been fulfilled everyone is happy let's go that's the first thing warning
[Guest]: the second option would have been that Rahul Gandhi is mad angry at people who have written
[Guest]: the letter throw everyone out only the loyalists or people who want to serve the congress party
[Guest]: and the family will remain in the party that's the second option at least it serves the purpose
[Guest]: of Rahul Gandhi right everyone has been thrown out that also didn't happen the third option
[Guest]: was G23 and it had some big names these people should have decided to basically take the party
[Guest]: by coup right basically form a different congress Nehru and say uh people who like we are we are
[Guest]: going to have a new party this is the constitution of the new party this is the organizational
[Guest]: structure and this is going to be a full-time party and we are going to have an election
[Guest]: internal election in six months those who want to join the party come back just split the party in
[Guest]: the middle they didn't do that because none one i don't think anyone has that kind of resource
[Guest]: and legitimacy to run a national level party at that moment so that was the third option at least
[Guest]: at least there would have been some solution nothing the fourth option was do nothing
[Guest]: basically you write a letter someone will leak the letter then there will be some tweets uh
[Guest]: there that you know if you have disagreements it should be put in the party forum not on the
[Guest]: public platform like there's no big purgings suddenly like you know just sideline one or
[Guest]: two people key people basically divide and rule and give some people access to the family and
[Guest]: some people don't get access to the family so the system continues so basically congress party
[Guest]: at the end chose the fourth one the election has still not happened there is no full-time
[Guest]: president of the party and it just goes on right so and this is i think the tragedy of the party
[Guest]: like right now it's in icu it needs a serious operation but it's still living under certain
[Guest]: and pretense of history that it's a national party that runs from kashmir to kanyakumari
[Guest]: to it does it still thinks that it is the default governing party of india it still thinks that
[Guest]: there would be a day that narendra modi and bgp will lose which of course they will lose at some
[Guest]: point and they will be the default option it still thinks that because rahul gandhi is still 50 and
[Guest]: the prime ministers in this country can also become at 75 or 80 so one day rahul gandhi will
[Guest]: become the prime minister if not now so you keep hearing this conversation among like congress
[Guest]: enthusiast that congress is preparing for 2029 election right if you are not sort of like strong
[Guest]: or at least willing to fight in present i don't know whether you will even survive as a political
[Guest]: party by 2029 i'm not basically writing an obituary of congress party but given that like
[Guest]: history teaches me that congress does not know a route to revival in any of the state i'm not
[Guest]: very confident of possibility of congress party's revival at the national level in fact if i have to
[Guest]: like if someone puts a gun on my head and say like bet on what would be congress party's vote shared
[Guest]: in in in next election i think it will go further down because all the indications at the state
[Guest]: level is that congress has lost votes in many of the states and and just thinking from like a very
[Guest]: strategic voters perspective if in many of these states or seats they don't think congress mp or
[Guest]: congress candidate is going to win elections they're not going to vote for the party so naturally
[Guest]: the party is going to get restricted to fewer seats and fewer states and slowly it will become
[Guest]: unlike state level parties in four or five states yeah and like you've pointed out that any state
[Amit Varma]: where it's gone to less than 20 percent of the vote it basically hasn't managed to revive itself
[Amit Varma]: why should it do that now it also strikes me that the incentives of the party are very different
[Amit Varma]: from the incentives of the people who lead the party right now for the people who lead the party
[Amit Varma]: one because they are surrounded by psychophants and no one who will tell them the truth or
[Amit Varma]: perhaps they're delusional and they don't want to listen to the truth and they actually believe
[Amit Varma]: that at some point modi will lose and we will be the choice then like you pointed out that they
[Amit Varma]: believe that you know their incentives are just keeping hold of the party at all costs whereas
[Amit Varma]: the party's incentives are would be to just get fresh leadership find someone who can win let
[Amit Varma]: people emerge from within the system and that's not happening and it's all kind of atrophy you
[Amit Varma]: know i get the game theoretic aspects of it what i find a little baffling is that like you said
[Amit Varma]: earlier there are so many tall leaders in the congress people uh i respect a lot and would have
[Amit Varma]: no hesitation backing and yet you know they also show the same psychofancy for example uh you know
[Amit Varma]: when i think rahul gandhi had stepped down as president p chidambaram said oh the congress
[Amit Varma]: needs sonia g to be president and all of that and i really don't get that you know because those guys
[Amit Varma]: know what the country is going through those guys know that our democracy is in is actually in
[Amit Varma]: danger and we need a strong opposition and uh you know and that this is not it these are profoundly
[Guest]: smart accomplished people so it's it's completely bizarre and that's why i i think the concerns
[Guest]: raised by g23 like that was genuine and serious concern that was their attempt and and uh to
[Guest]: basically you know make things public uh their concern i i don't think it's basically just their
[Guest]: hunger for power and other things you one shouldn't just dismiss all politicians as cynics
[Guest]: and they have no stake in the system but it it does baffle that why are they not taking things
[Guest]: head-on perhaps many of them are old and you know power has its own uh way of generating uh
[Guest]: psychofancies right it's not just in congress party it's in bjp today it happens everywhere
[Guest]: and it's the job of the leader to basically uh separate out uh the feedback from the uh
[Guest]: psychophantic psychophants and and their praises because that becomes the main reason for the
[Guest]: decline of leaders and and organizations and parties if you are not getting proper feedback
[Amit Varma]: and channels yeah but these guys aren't leaders they're inheritors you know they didn't get there
[Amit Varma]: by leading so here's my question for you that the paradigm of indian politics has completely
[Amit Varma]: changed where we have gone from a unipolar party to being a unipolar system to a unipolar system
[Amit Varma]: in another way where the bjp is at the center of everything and one they are a dominant force
[Amit Varma]: within indian politics today too it seems that many of the ideological foundations of the past
[Amit Varma]: need a relooking because you know they've managed to consolidate a lot of separate identities within
[Amit Varma]: something called the within the hindu vote which many would have thought was not possible say
[Amit Varma]: at the time of mandal nobody ever thought that mandir will take completely subsume mandal
[Amit Varma]: but in a sense they've made strong steps in that direction and and one of the fundamental truths
[Amit Varma]: of politics that seems to be playing out here is something the german theorist karl schmidt once
[Amit Varma]: said when he said that you know politics always needs an other and you know the congress didn't
[Amit Varma]: need an other because they inherited the country in a sense the same way the gandhis inherited this
[Amit Varma]: congress but uh the bjp has another they're very clear about who this other is and it is of course
[Amit Varma]: the muslims and they might modify uh this notion of the other as they go along and one theory of
[Amit Varma]: what will happen to the party is that look because there's no opposition outside there will be
[Amit Varma]: opposition inside and it will splinter and there will be factions like already if you google trads
[Amit Varma]: versus writers you'll find ferocious uh debates if you go down right wing rabbit holes on youtube
[Amit Varma]: and all that about who is a true hindu and who is not and there are people who are arguing that
[Amit Varma]: modiji has actually let hindus down by for example not changing the syllabus in schools and all of
[Amit Varma]: that and by you know not building the temple until a couple of years ago that was a complaint
[Amit Varma]: and there's a sense that these guys have got on a tiger which even they can't control
[Amit Varma]: so look going ahead how does indian politics evolve because it seems to me that the paradigm
[Amit Varma]: that you set out in identity and ideology that of the politics of statism and representation
[Amit Varma]: no longer applies the game has changed so one where do you see it going and two is there a
[Amit Varma]: precedent of something like this anywhere in the world where you have this one dominant party
[Amit Varma]: in this large complex vibrant democracy and you know what has happened there i wouldn't say that
[Guest]: you know politics of recognition and statism does not apply at all to what is happening now
[Guest]: and a few years down the line see uh form and modes of debate might change but i think some
[Guest]: elements of recognition and statism will continue to shape uh indian politics because birthmarks of
[Guest]: childhood does not go very easily so certain things that were inflicted at the time of
[Guest]: independence and nation building will remain there like i don't think the debate of accommodating
[Guest]: groups into body politing using the means of reservation and affirmative action is anytime
[Guest]: going to go you will keep seeing demand for some form of reservation or the other similarly this
[Guest]: debate of whether india is a hindu country or a secular country or at least like showing some sort
[Guest]: of majoritarian tendencies will continue to keep basically getting back and again right like now
[Guest]: population control bill and then uh so citizenship remains a very very contested space and and it is
[Guest]: going to shape indian politics even on the side of statism i think we will continue to see both on
[Guest]: what should be the role of and its form will change right like as as as society will change
[Guest]: on marriage norms not just marriage norms but dating norms and you know like what one should
[Guest]: eat and what one shouldn't eat and should state be forming laws of what should be eaten or not
[Guest]: eaten so in some ways those debates will continue to shape our society and of course new elements
[Guest]: will also keep coming uh in uh right and there is also going to be some distinction which will
[Guest]: keep happening like a good example would be like you know right now bjp gets a lot of support from
[Guest]: young people and young people are also most connected in the global world through mobile
[Guest]: right so like one part of traditional bjp mindset would be to not allow premarital dating or not
[Guest]: having legislation of same-sex marriages and other things but many of these uh young people who are
[Guest]: seeing things in different parts of the world where progressive norms are being passed or
[Guest]: followed there will be pressures right because it's your base how you have to respond to this
[Guest]: basis concern so so there are going to be those kind of conflicts that will also creep into
[Guest]: the system i would also like not disagree but i think it would be a very narrow reading of
[Guest]: uh bjp that the other for the bjp is always muslim it's a constant other but they will also
[Guest]: keep constructing different others right and so for the congress also indra created some other
[Guest]: nehru created some other so rahul gandhi is creating the other which is rss and bjp's
[Guest]: modi india so you keep constructing others but the question is when you construct the narrative
[Guest]: on the other how credible your construction of that narrative is ultimately a voter is basically
[Guest]: going to choose between the competitive credibilities of narratives right everyone
[Guest]: wants to do away with poverty and make everyone happy and bring development but i'm going to
[Guest]: believe certain narratives and certain people and not that's how i'm going to respond as voters so
[Guest]: this will keep happening the third point where we are heading in terms of like a party system
[Guest]: one thing and this is my lack of knowledge which is i don't know a case of basically a democracy
[Guest]: where we saw in 50 70 100 years span of time two different dominant parties coming up one basically
[Guest]: completely going down and one completely coming up of course there has been moments in political
[Guest]: history of britain when conservative party was basically winning consecutive elections and then
[Guest]: labor was winning consecutive elections but we are a young democracy 70 year old and and those kind
[Guest]: of things so no parallel as such comes to my mind but the emerging political system which i see now
[Guest]: is that because of the weakening of the congress in last two elections and its inability to basically
[Guest]: a find its inability to find a path of revival has now basically given like basically other players
[Guest]: have tasted blood and they are going to basically now they know if they have to rise they have to
[Guest]: basically feed off congress so now there are going to be parties which will show cannibalizing
[Guest]: cannibalizing tendencies on the congress party so you see like couple of days ago or weeks ago
[Guest]: there was talks of opposition unity and now tmc after winning trinamool congress after winning
[Guest]: west bengal election is basically poaching on congress leader got sushmita dev in northeast got
[Guest]: goa former cm in goa so now they see one possibility to expand themselves amadi party
[Guest]: especially after the crisis in punjab sees an opportunity to expand itself in punjab in the
[Guest]: short run what would happen that as congress declines further basically these two parties
[Guest]: tmc and up seem to be making a smaller headway despite that i don't see themselves basically
[Guest]: becoming a party which will get 70 or 80 odd seats any of them both of them combined tmc or up will
[Guest]: basically get at max 100 seats right so what will happen you will have three players at number two
[Guest]: congress tmc or aap basically fighting the number two spot which means that at there is more
[Guest]: fragmentation happening so the electoral distance between the second position and the bjp will
[Guest]: further increase so dominance is often sustained by oppositional fragmentation right this is what
[Guest]: was happening between 67 and 1989 that there were lots of parties challenging congress in the state
[Guest]: but they were not coming together at the national level to basically dislodge it or challenge it
[Guest]: so it may actually elongate the shelf life of bjp as a dominant player nationally despite all the
[Guest]: crisis building up and other things so that's going to be the medium term prediction of course
[Guest]: bjp also has to think that one of them the either the tmc or aap when they get bigger they are going
[Guest]: to challenge bjp also the interesting part is that tmc and up are coming from slightly different
[Guest]: angles the tmc is coming much more from the center left side like basically mobilizing
[Guest]: muslims talking about religious minorities up is coming much more from the center right use
[Guest]: uh use certain terms of cage deval like he he's going to in like they have promised to introduce
[Guest]: more patriotism or nationalistic elements in their syllabus so so in some ways i don't know which
[Guest]: this is a hard question for me to at the moment answer who is a bigger challenge for bjp in the
[Guest]: long run whether it will be up or tmc because both can become and i i thought about it there's so
[Guest]: many permutation and combination that it will take 15 minutes to sort of just like spell that out but
[Guest]: yeah bjp also needs to think of which one would be the challenger and how to tackle it but amidst
[Guest]: all of this drama which will happen in the political system basically we will have no effective
[Guest]: opposition to challenge the dominant player because they will be cannibalizing of each other
[Amit Varma]: which is a bad thing for democracy in that sense and not just no effective opposition but also
[Amit Varma]: the bjp is using the institutions of the state especially the you know the security apparatus
[Amit Varma]: of the state to crack down on its enemies so hard that you know is crushing dissent so hard
[Amit Varma]: that you know it's it's it's kind of uh it looks bleak but then the thing is things change in
[Amit Varma]: politics very very fast you know 10 years ago if you said that a brand new party is going to win
[Amit Varma]: delhi so overwhelmingly as a update it would have seemed ridiculous so you never know what kind of
[Amit Varma]: disruption is around the corner and what direction the disruption goes in it's not necessarily going
[Amit Varma]: to be a good one i mean you know that old martin luther king about arc of history bending towards
[Amit Varma]: justice or freedom or whatever your favorite value would be i worry that it might be visual thinking
[Amit Varma]: that it bends in a good direction you know the sample size of democracies is really small the
[Amit Varma]: sample size of even political movements in history is really small if you ask any statistician to
[Amit Varma]: draw a conclusion that there is one direction it necessarily goes in when there are so many
[Amit Varma]: authoritarian movements around the world on the rise uh might be a bit optimistic so my last
[Amit Varma]: question to you is looking say 20 years into the future you know uh looking and i'm not going to
[Amit Varma]: ask you what's going to happen in 2041 just through the entire span of this what makes you
[Amit Varma]: you hopeful and what makes you despair what's the best case scenario and a worst case scenario
[Guest]: which is another way of putting this so i'm hopeful uh hopeful the reason being basically
[Guest]: the history of democracy tells me that it moves in crest and troughs right so three waves of
[Guest]: democratization at the moment we are seeing a global democratic recession in like so in my
[Guest]: opinion for next couple of years we will see more constraints on democratic values and norm
[Guest]: but then there will be revival the question is what will bring those revivals the moment like
[Guest]: the sad or the distressing part is what is happening to the economy what is happening
[Guest]: to our institutions and uh you know which is basically given the size of our country five
[Guest]: six of years of economic slowdown uh and no path of recovery basically will create a big lost
[Guest]: generation so so that makes me sad but but i also think that while having conversations with these
[Guest]: young people everywhere i still see everyone is hopeful hopeful and optimistic of their chances
[Guest]: to do well in life and i think the like the hope of these young people to do well in life is
[Guest]: basically going to put some restraints on further going down of democracy values and norms because
[Guest]: everyone needs some sort of like a system some rule some rule of law which assures their path
[Guest]: of mobility which assures that whatever gains they are going to make will be protected by some rule
[Guest]: of law so i think that what makes me hopeful and in 10 15 20 years we will be the bad phase would be
[Guest]: behind us and we will be on a recovery path that's really hopeful and i hope you're right
[Amit Varma]: but what makes me despair is that someone more than a decade younger than me is constantly
[Amit Varma]: using the phrase these young people these young people bro to me you are these young people
[Guest]: so what uh what what can old folks basically like you know uh everyone expects their next
[Guest]: generation to do something better uh than them so i'm hoping what my generation is not able to do
[Guest]: perhaps the 25 year olds would basically change things
[Amit Varma]: or no no i i i am hopeful for you as well i'll say he hope i go so uh good luck with your book i
[Amit Varma]: can't wait to read the full book both of you must come on my show once that is done and we can have
[Guest]: longer detailed discussions uh thank you so much for your time today thank you amit it was a lovely
[Guest]: conversation and hope anyone who's going to listen to it will enjoy the conversation if you have any
[Guest]: suggestions or comments please do write to me as we think more about this book you might regret
[Amit Varma]: making that offer thanks bro thank you if you enjoyed listening to this episode head on over
[Amit Varma]: to the show notes enter rabbit holes at will rahul and nasim's book is a work in progress
[Amit Varma]: but you can pick up rahul's previous book co-written with pradeep chabber called ideology
[Amit Varma]: and identity you can follow him on twitter at rahul underscore t varma and varma in that case
[Amit Varma]: spelled with a v e r m a and you can follow me on twitter at amit varma a m i t v a r m a the
[Amit Varma]: varmas collided in this magnificent meeting aren't you privileged to have listened to it
[Amit Varma]: you can browse past episodes of the scene and the unseen at seen unseen dot i n thank you for
[Amit Varma]: listening did you enjoy this episode of the scene in the unseen if so would you like to support the
[Amit Varma]: production of the show you can go over to seen unseen dot i n slash support and contribute any
[Amit Varma]: amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking thank you you